Thank you for downloading this Simon & Schuster
ebook.
Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on new releases, deals,
recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to sign up and see terms
and conditions.

CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP
Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and send you
more of what you like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers in your inbox.

Contents

Introduction

1
1 Gaylord
2 Ann Arbor
3 The Room-Sized Brain
4 MIT
5 A Decidedly Unconventional Type of Youngster
6 Cold Spring Harbor
7 The Labs
8 Princeton
9 Fire Control
10 A Six-Day Workweek
11 The Unspeakable System
12 Turing
13 Manhattan

2
14 The Utter Dark
15 From Intelligence to Information
16 The Bomb
17 Building a Bandwagon
18 Mathematical Intentions, Honorable and Otherwise
19 Wiener
20 A Transformative Year
21 TMI
22 “We Urgently Need the Assistance of Dr. Claude E. Shannon”
23 The Man-Machines
24 The Game of Kings
25 Constructive Dissatisfaction

3
26 Professor Shannon
27 Inside Information
28 A Gadgeteer’s Paradise
29 Peculiar Motions
30 Kyoto
31 The Illness
32 Aftershocks

Photographs
Acknowledgments
About the Authors
Illustration Credits
Notes
Bibliography
Index

For Abigail, born 6/22/15
—R.G.
For Meagan
—J.S.

Geniuses are the luckiest of mortals because what they must do
is the same as what they most want to do and, even if their
genius is unrecognized in their lifetime, the essential earthly
reward is always theirs, the certainty that their work is good
and will stand the test of time. One suspects that the geniuses
will be least in the Kingdom of Heaven—if, indeed, they ever
make it; they have had their reward.
—W. H. AUDEN

INTRODUCTION
The thin, white-haired man had spent hours wandering in and out of
meetings at the International Information Theory Symposium in
Brighton, England, before the rumors of his identity began to
proliferate. At first the autograph seekers came in a trickle, and then
they clogged hallways in long lines. At the evening banquet, the
symposium’s chairman took the microphone to announce that “one of
the greatest scientific minds of our time” was in attendance and
would share a few words—but once he arrived onstage, the thin,
white-haired man could not make himself heard over the peals of
applause.
And then finally, when the noise had died down: “This is—
ridiculous!” Lacking more to say, he removed three balls from his
pocket and began to juggle.
After it was over, someone asked the chairman to put into
perspective what had just happened. “It was,” he said, “as if Newton
had showed up at a physics conference.

It was 1985, and the juggler’s work was long over, and just
beginning. It had been nearly four decades since Claude Elwood
Shannon published “the Magna Carta of the Information Age”—

invented, in a single stroke, the idea of information. And yet the world
his idea had made possible was only just coming into being. Now we
live immersed in that world, and every email we have ever sent, every
DVD and sound file we have ever played, and every Web page we have
ever loaded bears a debt to Claude Shannon.
It was a debt he was never especially keen to collect. He was a man
immune to scientific fashion and insulated from opinion of all kinds,
on all subjects, even himself, especially himself; a man of closed doors
and long silences, who thought his best thoughts in spartan bachelor
apartments and empty office buildings. A colleague called Shannon’s
information theory “a bomb.” It was stunning in its scope—he had
conceived of a new science nearly from scratch—and stunning in its
surprise—he had gone years barely speaking a word of it to anyone.
Of course, information existed before Shannon, just as objects had
inertia before Newton. But before Shannon, there was precious little
sense of information as an idea, a measurable quantity, an object
fitted out for hard science. Before Shannon, information was a
telegram, a photograph, a paragraph, a song. After Shannon,
information was entirely abstracted into bits. The sender no longer
mattered, the intent no longer mattered, the medium no longer
mattered, not even the meaning mattered: a phone conversation, a
snatch of Morse telegraphy, a page from a detective novel were all
brought under a common code. Just as geometers subjected a circle in
the sand and the disc of the sun to the same laws, and as physicists
subjected the sway of a pendulum and the orbits of the planets to the

same laws, Claude Shannon made our world possible by getting at the
essence of information.
It is a puzzle of his life that someone so skilled at abstracting his
way past the tangible world was also so gifted at manipulating it.
Shannon was a born tinkerer: a telegraph line rigged from a barbedwire fence, a makeshift barn elevator, and a private backyard trolley
tell the story of his small-town Michigan childhood. And it was as an
especially advanced sort of tinkerer that he caught the eye of
Vannevar Bush—soon to become the most powerful scientist in
America and Shannon’s most influential mentor—who brought him to
MIT and charged him with the upkeep of the differential analyzer, an
analog computer the size of a room, “a fearsome thing of shafts, gears,
strings, and wheels rolling on disks” that happened to be the most
advanced thinking machine of its day.
Shannon’s study of the electrical switches directing the guts of that
mechanical behemoth led him to an insight at the foundation of our
digital age: that switches could do far more than control the flow of
electricity through circuits—that they could be used to evaluate any
logical statement we could think of, could even appear to “decide.” A
series of binary choices—on/off, true/false, 1/0—could, in principle,
perform a passable imitation of a brain. That leap, as Walter Isaacson
put it, “became the basic concept underlying all digital computers.” It
was Shannon’s first great feat of abstraction. He was only twenty-one.
A career that launched with “possibly the most important, and also
the most famous, master’s thesis of the century” brought him into

contact and collaboration with thinkers like Bush, Alan Turing, and
John von Neumann: all, like Shannon, founders of our era. It brought
him into often-reluctant cooperation with the American defense
establishment and into arcane work on cryptography, computercontrolled gunnery, and the encrypted transatlantic phone line that
connected Roosevelt and Churchill in the midst of world war. And it
brought him to Bell Labs, an industrial R&D operation that considered
itself less an arm of the phone company than a home for “the
operation of genius.” “People did very well at Bell Labs,” said one of
Shannon’s colleagues, “when they did what others thought was
impossible.” Shannon’s choice of the impossible was, he wrote, “an
analysis of some of the fundamental properties of general systems for
the transmission of intelligence, including telephony, radio, television,
telegraphy, etc.”—systems that, from a mathematical perspective,
appeared to have nothing essential in common until Shannon proved
that they had everything essential in common. It would be his second,
and greatest, feat of abstraction.
Before

the

publication

of

his

“Mathematical

Theory

of

Communication,” scientists could track the movement of electrons in
a wire, but the possibility that the very idea they stood for could be
measured and manipulated just as objectively would have to wait until
it was proved by Shannon. It was summed up in his recognition that
all information, no matter the source, the sender, the recipient, or the
meaning, could be efficiently represented by a sequence of bits:
information’s fundamental unit.

Before the “Mathematical Theory of Communication,” a century of
common sense and engineering trial and error said that noise—the
physical world’s tax on our messages—had to be lived with. And yet
Shannon proved that noise could be defeated, that information sent
from Point A could be received with perfection at Point B, not just
often, but essentially always. He gave engineers the conceptual tools
to digitize information and send it flawlessly (or, to be precise, with an
arbitrarily small amount of error), a result considered hopelessly
utopian up until the moment Shannon proved it was not. Another
engineer marveled, “How he got that insight, how he even came to
believe such a thing, I don’t know.”
That insight is embedded in the circuits of our phones, our
computers, our satellite TVs, our space probes still tethered to the
earth with thin cords of 0’s and 1’s. In 1990, the Voyager 1 probe
turned its camera back on Earth from the edge of the solar system,
snapped a picture of our planetary home reduced in size to less than a
single pixel—to what Carl Sagan called “a mote of dust suspended in a
sunbeam”—and transmitted that picture across four billion miles of
void. Claude Shannon did not write the code that protected that
image from error and distortion, but, some four decades earlier, he
had proved that such a code must exist. And so it did. It is part of his
legacy; and so is the endless flow of digital information on which the
Internet depends, and so is the information omnivory by which we
define ourselves as modern.

By his early thirties, he was one of the brightest stars of American
science, with the media attention and prestigious awards to prove it.
Yet, at the height of his brief fame, when his information theory had
become the buzz-phrase to explain everything from geology to politics
to music, Shannon published a four-paragraph article kindly urging
the rest of the world to vacate his “bandwagon.” Impatient with all but
the most gifted, he still knew very little of ambition, or ego, or avarice,
or any of the other unsightly drivers of accomplishment. His best
ideas waited years for publication, and his interest drifted across
problems on a private channel of its own. Having completed his
pathbreaking work by the age of thirty-two, he might have spent his
remaining decades as a scientific celebrity, a public face of
innovation: another Bertrand Russell, or Albert Einstein, or Richard
Feynman, or Steve Jobs. Instead, he spent them tinkering.
An electronic, maze-solving mouse named Theseus. An Erector Set
turtle that walked his house. The first plan for a chess-playing
computer, a distant ancestor of IBM’s Deep Blue. The first-ever
wearable computer. A calculator that operated in Roman numerals,
code-named THROBAC (“Thrifty Roman-Numeral Backward-Looking
Computer”). A fleet of customized unicycles. Years devoted to the
scientific study of juggling.
And, of course, the Ultimate Machine: a box and a switch, which,
when flipped on, produced a whirring of gears and a mechanical hand
that emerged from the box, flipped the switch off, and disappeared
again. Claude Shannon was self-effacing in much the same way.

Rarely has a thinker who devoted his life to the study of
communication been so uncommunicative. Seen in profile, he almost
vanished: a gaunt stick of a man, and a man almost entirely written
out of a history defined by self-promoters.
His was a life spent in the pursuit of curious, serious play; he was
that rare scientific genius who was just as content rigging up a
juggling robot or a flamethrowing trumpet as he was pioneering digital
circuits. He worked with levity and played with gravity; he never
acknowledged a distinction between the two. His genius lay above all
in the quality of the puzzles he set for himself. And the marks of his
playful mind—the mind that wondered how a box of electric switches
could mimic a brain, and the mind that asked why no one ever decides
to say “XFOML RXKHRJFFJUJ”—are imprinted on all of his deepest
insights. Maybe it is too much to presume that the character of an age
bears some stamp of the character of its founders; but it would be
pleasant to think that so much of what is essential to ours was
conceived in the spirit of play.

1

1
Gaylord
Here are 110 diamonds, “not one of them small,” 18 rubies, 310
emeralds, 21 sapphires, one opal, 200 solid gold rings, 30 solid gold
chains, 83 gold crucifixes, five gold censers, 197 gold watches, and
one monumental gold punch bowl, and they are exactly where the
code said they would be. They are a pirate’s hoard, buried five feet
down in the South Carolina soil, in the shadow of a gnarled tulip
poplar tree. But the tale doesn’t end with the treasure; it ends with the
code.
William Legrand found it on a parchment washed up from a
shipwreck. For months, he sat up learning cryptanalysis by firelight to
crack it. And now that the hoard is his, he’s content to leave the
diamonds counted in a corner while he explains himself at great
length to the young man he enlisted to dig it up.
It is simpler than it looks:
53‡‡†305))6*;4826)4‡.)4‡);806*;48†8’60))85;]8*:‡*8†83
(88)5*†;46(;88*96*?;8)*‡(;485);5*†2:*‡(;4956*2(5*-4)8’8*;

4069285);)6†8)4‡‡;1(‡9;48081;8:8‡1;48†85;4)485†528806*81
(‡9;48;(88;4(‡?34;48)4‡;161;:188;‡?;
Count how often the symbols appear and then compare them with
the most common letters in the English language. Assume that the
most frequent symbol is the most frequent letter: 8 means “E.” The
most common word in English is “the,” so look for a repeated threeletter sequence ending in 8. The sequence ;48 recurs seven times: if it
encodes “the,” we know that ; means “T” and 4 means “H.” Follow
those three letters to new letters. ;(88 can only be “tree,” and so (
means “R.” Each symbol solved solves new symbols, and soon the
directions to the treasure resolve out of the noise.
Edgar Allan Poe wrote sixty-five stories. This one, “The Gold-Bug,”
is the only one to end with a lecture on cryptanalysis. It is Claude
Shannon’s favorite.

Here is where Gaylord, Michigan, ends. The roads turn dirt and
give out in potato fields. Main Street is only blocks behind. Ahead are
the fields and feedlots, the Michigan apple orchards, the woods of
maple, beech, birch, the lumber factory digesting the woods into
planks and blocks. Barbed wire runs along the roads and between the
pastures, and Claude walks the fences—one half-mile stretch of fence
especially.
Claude’s stretch is electric. He charged it himself: he hooked up
dry-cell batteries at each end, and spliced spare wire into any gaps to

run the current unbroken. Insulation was anything at hand: leather
straps, glass bottlenecks, corncobs, inner-tube pieces. Keypads at each
end—one at his house on North Center Street, the other at his friend’s
house half a mile away—made it a private barbed-wire telegraph. Even
insulated, it is apt to be silenced for months in the ice and snow that
accumulate on it, at the knuckle of Michigan’s middle finger. But
when the fence thaws and Claude patches the wire, and the current
runs again from house to house, he can speak again at lightspeed and,
best of all, in code.
In the 1920s, when Claude was a boy, some three million farmers
talked through networks like these, wherever the phone company
found it unprofitable to build. It was America’s folk grid. Better
networks than Claude’s carried voices along the fences, and kitchens
and general stores doubled as switchboards. But the most interesting
stretch of fence in Gaylord was the one that carried Claude Shannon’s
information.
Where does a boy like that come from?

Reporting on the wedding of Claude Shannon’s parents, the
Otsego County Times declared itself bamboozled: “Shannon-Wolf
Nuptials: Wedding Took Place at Lansing on Wednesday—Date Had
Been Kept a Profound Secret.” By the paper’s account, Claude
Shannon Sr. had managed to get married without anyone in town
being the wiser.

That Tuesday, August 24, 1909, toward the end of Shannon’s third
summer in town, a sign appeared on the door of his furniture store: “IF
ANYTHING IS WANTED CALL J. LEE MORFORD.” That night, Shannon Sr. took

the midnight train to Lansing, to the home of the parents of his brideto-be, Mabel Wolf. “The unconcern which Mr. Shannon displayed as
he waited for the train which was nearly an hour late showed that he
was perfectly satisfied that no one had gotten wind of his leaving
town,” reported the paper. The following day, he married Mabel in a
quiet ceremony at six o’clock. The bride wore a “wedding gown of
white satin with a yoke of lace, and a net veil made with a coronet
edged with seed pearls.” It seems that the groom concealed the
information about the wedding only to keep the party down to a
manageable size.
If the paper feigned shock at Shannon’s surprise trip to Lansing,
the rest of the piece was all small-town sincerity and good wishes.
“Mr. Shannon, the groom, has since his residence in this community,
made many warm friendships in a business and social way,” the paper
noted, “and Miss Wolf, the bride, during her many years teaching in
the high school here, endeared herself to the people of this
community. Mr. and Mrs. Shannon, accept the congratulations of the
Times and your many friends in this community.”
That a run-of-the-mill wedding announcement constituted frontpage news says much about the smallness of Gaylord, Michigan. But
then, the Shannons were the kinds of people whose wedding date
ought to have been common knowledge. Claude Sr. and Mabel were

bright threads in Gaylord’s fabric. They were neighborly and active in
the Methodist church. In downtown Gaylord, two well-known
buildings were the work of Claude Sr.: the post office and the
furniture showroom with the Masonic lodge tucked upstairs.
Born in 1862 in Oxford, New Jersey, Claude Elwood Shannon Sr.
was a traveling salesman who arrived in town just after the turn of the
century and bet on its fortunes. He put down his stake—bought out
the business dealing in furniture and funerals—and lived to see it pay.
“Something which should be found in every home. Nothing more
sanitary. The new styles are more attractive. Come in and look over
our New Line of furniture,” read a typical advertisement in the paper
from “C. E. Shannon, The Furniture Man.” In Claude Jr.’s childhood,
Gaylord was a town of 3,000, and Claude Sr. was a town father: school
board, poor board, county fair board, undertaker, Arch Mason, Worthy
Patron of the Eastern Star, the kind of Republican for whom the word
staunch was invented.
His most significant stretch of employment, and the one that
earned him the title of “Judge Shannon,” was the eleven years he
spent as Otsego County probate judge. He settled estates and minor
financial disputes, served as notary public, and played the part of
local politician and worthy. His service, though modest and conducted
in his spare time, was widely appreciated. In 1931, a two-column
profile celebrating the twenty-fifth anniversary of his “advent”
described Mr. Shannon as “one of our most public-spirited citizens. . . .
The years have told the story of a successful business career, due

largely to his excellent executive ability and persistency of purpose.”
Claude Jr., later on, found less to say about him: clever, distant. “He
would sometimes help me with my Erector set,” he said, “but he really
didn’t give me much scientific guidance.” Claude Sr. was already sixtynine at Claude’s high school graduation; Claude was the son of his old
age.
Mabel Wolf was Claude Sr.’s second wife, and she had married him
at age twenty-nine, late for a woman of that era. She was eighteen
years younger than her husband. Born in Lansing on September 14,
1880, she was a first-generation American. Her father emigrated from
Germany to the Union army, survived the Civil War in a
sharpshooters’ company, and died before he could know Mabel, his
last child. Her widowed mother struggled to bring up six children
alone in a strange country. Few women in rural Michigan were college
graduates—Mabel Wolf was. She arrived in Gaylord with “glowing
recommendations” from her professors and took up what was, at the
time, the usual work for a woman of intelligence and independence:
teaching.
In time, Mabel became principal of Gaylord High, serving in that
post for seven years. She was, by all accounts, an active and energetic
schoolteacher and administrator. She coached the school’s first-ever
girls’ basketball team and raised money for uniforms and trips. But for
all her success, the paper reported the following in 1932:
At a meeting of the school board it was decided not to hire
any married women teachers during the coming school year

due to economic conditions. It was decided that when a
husband was capable of making a living it would be unfair
competition to hire married women. Mrs. Mabel Shannon,
Mrs. Lyons, and Mrs. Melvin Cook will be out of the school
system due to this ruling.
By that point, at least, there was much in her private life to occupy
her. She was a singer and musician of local note. She joined the
Library Board and the Pythian Sisters, and she served a term as
president of the Gaylord Study Club. When she wasn’t volunteering
with the Red Cross or the PTA, she lent her contralto voice to town
functions and funerals and hosted music clubs in the Shannon living
room. In 1905, she landed the leading role of Queen Elizabeth in the
operetta Two Queens at the local opera house.

Situated in the middle of northern Michigan’s central plateau,
Gaylord took its name from an employee of the Michigan Central
Railroad, which linked many such off-the-beaten-path towns to the
rapidly growing hub of Chicago. Gaylord’s destiny was shaped by
topography and climate perfect for growing millions of acres of forest.
The trees drew the lumber industry, and the first visitors and
inhabitants were willing to contend with the climate for the rich
cache of white pine and hardwoods. But the environment was austere,
with subzero temperatures and thick lake-effect snow. A local history
from 1856 concluded, perhaps self-servingly, that the harsh climate

offered a brand of moral education: “The fact that [Northern
Michigan’s] pioneers had more to struggle against in order to provide
homes for themselves and the necessary accompaniments of homes
developed in them a degree of aggressive energy which has remained
as a distinct sectional possession . . . a splendid type of manhood and
womanhood—self-reliant, strong, straight-forward, enterprising and
moral.”
By the time Claude Sr. and Mabel became parents—their daughter,
Catherine, was born in 1910, and Claude Jr., the baby of the family, in
1916—the pioneers had come and gone. The town’s limits and
industries were well established: Gaylord would make itself known for
farming and forestry, and a bit of light industry. As the railroads
ramified, Gaylord found itself at the intersection of key lines. It
became the county seat. Banks and businesses cropped up on Main
Street, and the town’s population grew and settled around them. But
Gaylord remained more village than city, its roots in the making of
things: ten pins, sleighs, massive wheels for the transport of timber.
Gaylord was the kind of place in which just about any event was
newsworthy. Consider the headlines and snippets from the county
newspaper: “WISCONSIN GIRL KILLS WOLF WITH MOP STICK”; “A woman
smoking a cigarette on the Midway caused some attention, not all of
which was favorable”; “LUMBERJACK DIES OF APOPLEXY”; “VERN MATTS LOSES
FINGER”; “MEETING CALLED TO DISCUSS ARTICHOKES.” And one September, a

paragraph-long ode to a glorious run of fall weather, the lakes like

blue mirrors by day and “splotches of silver” by night, a waxing moon
bright enough to light up a printed page.
Claude was three years old when the local diner called the Sugar
Bowl opened (also headline news). It was, the paper reported, “the first
business on Main Street to errect [sic] an electric sign outside. Main
Street was so dark in those days that the Village Band once gave an
after-dark concert under the sign.”

Biographies of geniuses often open as stories of overzealous
parenting. We think of Beethoven’s father, beating his son into the
shape of a prodigy. Or John Stuart Mill’s father, drilling his son in
Greek at the tender age of three. Or Norbert Wiener’s father, declaring
to the world that he could turn anything, even a broomstick, into a
genius with enough time and discipline. “Norbert always felt like that
broomstick,” a contemporary later remarked.
Compared to those childhoods, Shannon’s was ordinary. There was,
for instance, no indication in Claude’s earliest years of overbearing
parental pressure, and if he showed any signs of early precocity, they
were not memorable enough to have been written down or noted in
the local press. In fact, his older sister was the family’s standout: she
aced school, mastered piano, and plied her brother with homemade
math puzzles. She was also reported to be “one of Gaylord’s most
popular girls.” “She was a model student, which I couldn’t quite
follow,” Shannon admitted. He later suggested that a tincture of

sibling rivalry might have driven his initial interest in mathematics:
his big sister’s talent for numbers inspired him to strive for the same.
Claude had some successes of his own in his early schooling. In
1923, at the age of seven, he won a third-grade Thanksgiving storywriting contest, for his work “A Poor Boy”:
There once was a poor boy who thought that he was not going to
have a Thanksgiving dinner for he thought all his playmates
would forget him.
Even if they did, one man did not forget him because he
thought that he would surprise the little boy early Thanksgiving
morning.
So very early on Thanksgiving morning when he awoke, he
found a basket of good things at the door. It was filled with so
many good things and he was very happy all the day and he
never forgot the kind man.
He played the alto horn and performed in the school’s musicals.
Fifty-nine years later, he still remembered his classmates’ names. He
wrote to his fourth-grade teacher:
Some names that come back as through a glass darkly after a
half century are Kenny Sisson, Jimmy Nelson, Richard Cork,
Lyle Teeter (who committed suicide), Sam Qua, Ray Stoddard,
Mary Glasgow, John Kriske, Willard Thomas (a portly boy), Helen
Rogers (a portly girl), Kathleen Allen (smart girl), Helen

McKinnon (a pretty girl), Mary Fitzpatrick, and of course Rodney
Hutchins.
He held in his hands a copy of a black-and-white photo of the
fourth-grade class of 1924–25, so reduced in the copying that it took
a magnifying glass to resolve the children’s faces, and his own eightyear-old face bubbled and then flattened under the moving lens.
Gaunt and shy even in those days; piercing eyes. He remembered, too,
no doubt from experience, that “boys in those grades tend to fall in
adolescent love with their pretty teachers.”
Reflecting on his education with the benefit of hindsight, Shannon
would say that his interest in mathematics had, besides sibling rivalry,
a simple source: it just came easily to him. “I think one tends to get
into work that you find easy for yourself,” Shannon acknowledged.
High school lasted three years for Claude; he graduated a year ahead
of the other children in the photo. That said, he wasn’t at the top of
the class. When a 1932 report in the newspaper recognized three
students with straight A’s in his high school, Shannon was not among
them.
He loved science and disliked facts. Or rather, he disliked the kind
of facts that he couldn’t bring under a rule and abstract his way out
of. Chemistry in particular tested his patience. It “always seems a little
dull to me,” he wrote his science teacher years after; “too many
isolated facts and too few general principles for my taste.”

His early gifts were as mechanical as they were mental. Claude’s
field of vision, for hours at a time, was often the rudder of a model
plane or the propeller shaft of a toy boat. Gaylord’s broken radios
tended to pass through his hands. On April 17, 1930, thirteen-yearold Claude attended a Boy Scout rally and won “first place in the
second class wig-wag signalling contest.” The object was to speak
Morse code with the body, and no scout in the county spoke it as
quickly or accurately as Claude. Wig-wag was Morse code by flag: a
bright signaling flag (red stands out best against the sky) on a long
hickory pole. The mediocre signalers took pauses to think; the best,
like Claude, had something of the machine in them. Right meant dot,
left meant dash, dots and dashes meant breaks in the imaginary
current that meant words; he was a human telegraph.
These gifts were in the family—but perhaps they skipped a
generation. It seems that Claude took after his grandfather, David
Shannon Jr., the proud owner of U.S. Patent No. 407,130, a series of
improvements on the washing machine, complete with a reciprocating
plunger and valves for the discharge of “dirt, settlings, and foul
matter.” David Shannon died in 1910, six years before his grandson’s
birth. But for a boy of Claude Jr.’s mechanical bent, a certified
inventor in the family tree was something to brag about.
And the grandson inherited the tinkering gene. “As a young boy, I
built many things, working with mechanical stuff,” he recalled.
“Erector sets and electrical equipment, built radios, things of that sort.
I remember I had a radio controlled boat.” One neighbor, Shirley

Hutchins Gidden, offered to the Otsego Herald Times that Shannon
and her brother, Rodney Hutchins, were a conspiratorial pair. “He and
my brother were always busy—all harmless projects, but very
inventive.” She told a different reporter, “Claude was the brains and
Rod was the instigator.” One experiment stood out: a makeshift
elevator built by the two boys inside the Hutchins family barn. Shirley
was the “guinea pig,” the first to take a ride on the elevator, and it says
something about the quality of the boys’ handiwork (or her luck) that
she lived to tell the tale to a newspaper seven decades later. It was one
of many such contraptions, including a trolley in the Hutchins
backyard and the private, barbed-wire telegraph. “They were always
cooking up something,” said Gidden.

Predictably, Claude grew up worshipping Thomas Edison. And
yet the affinity between Edison and Claude Shannon was more than
happenstance. They shared an ancestor: John Ogden, a Puritan
stonemason, who crossed the Atlantic from Lancashire, England, to
build gristmills and dams, and with his brother raised the first
permanent church in Manhattan, two miles and three centuries from
the office where his descendant Claude Shannon would lay the
foundations of the Information Age.
It was finished by the spring of 1644, a twin-gabled Gothic church
at the island’s south tip, hard by the wall of the Dutch fort; the wood
shingles on its roof were meant to turn bluish over time and
rainstorms, into an imitation of costlier slate. Ogden, who planned it

from quarry to weathervane, is said to have been lean, hawk-nosed,
and stone stubborn; he was one of the New World’s first builders.
Most of us, Claude included, are less demanding than we might be
in our choice of idols: from the universe of possible heroes, we single
out the ones who already remind us of ourselves. Maybe that’s the
case for Claude and his distant cousin Edison—even if it was only
years after leaving Michigan for good that he discovered the link.
Good fortune to learn that one’s idol is one’s family—and Claude’s
fortune was better than most.

2
Ann Arbor
A’s in math and science and Latin, scattered B’s in the rest: the
sixteen-year-old high school graduate sent his record off to the
University of Michigan, along with an application that was three pages
of fill-in-the-blanks, the spelling errors casually crossed out.
8. Have you earned any money during your high-school course?
Yes.
How?
Peddeling papers and deleivering telegrams.
The same year he applied to Michigan, his sister graduated from it.
Claude was admitted as well, and Ann Arbor was the biggest swarm of
humanity he had ever seen.

One hundred and ninety-five miles southeast of Gaylord, Ann
Arbor was a city of steep hills and valleys, interrupted by the muddy
banks and low gradient of the slow-flowing Huron River. The Huron

sealed Ann Arbor’s fate as a mill town: sawmills and flour mills
punctuated the river banks and powered the economy. Immigrants
poured in, most from Germany, but also Greece, Italy, Russia, and
Poland. Their ethnic ties ran deep, and churches reinforced the
affiliations of caste and clan. By the beginning of the twentieth
century, half of Ann Arbor’s population was either foreign-born or
born to immigrant parents.
It was a population that suffused the city with an irrepressible
optimism. On the threshold of a century that would see the
Depression and two world wars, a 1901 issue of the Ann Arbor Argus
Democrat was moved to declare that “the century to come is
undoubtedly destined to be the richest and best that man has
experienced.” After the stock market crashed in October 1929, the
Ann Arbor Daily News covered the brief recoveries in stock prices
rather than report on the devastating declines. Even in December
1929—after more than $30 billion in wealth had evaporated, banks
had called in loans, and manufacturing had cratered—Ann Arbor’s
mayor, Edward Staebler, remained unfailingly buoyant, assuring locals
that the economy would recover and that the city would weather the
storm.
In the presidential contest of 1932, Ann Arbor defied the state of
Michigan. Franklin Roosevelt had won Michigan and forty-one other
states in an electoral landslide—but Ann Arbor remained a steadfast
Herbert Hoover stronghold. Editorials in the Daily News promised
recovery and urged voters not to lay the blame for the economy’s

troubles at President Hoover’s feet. His fellow Republicans held on to
local offices in Ann Arbor, one of the few places where the president’s
coattails did more good than harm.
The University of Michigan copied its town’s calm confidence. “I
am not at all discouraged,” university president A. G. Ruthven said in
1931. “I must admit that the curtailment of our resources has
permitted me to make certain changes in the organization which I
believe will be of lasting benefit.” Yet, by the time Claude Shannon
arrived at the university in the fall of 1932, that unflinching positivity
had run its course. The financial collapse had forced the University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor’s largest employer and its economic engine, to
shave enrollments, halt production on long-planned buildings, and
cut pay by 10 percent.
Still, Shannon’s timing was fortuitous. Had he arrived a decade
or two earlier, he would not have been the beneficiary of the
transformation of the university’s engineering program during the
early years of the twentieth century.
Under the leadership of Dean Mortimer Cooley, an unusually
enterprising university administrator, the College of Engineering’s
“enrollments . . . grew from less than 30 to more than 2,000, the
faculty from three instructors teaching several courses to more than
160 professors and staff teaching hundreds of courses, and a
temporary shop of 1,720 square feet to over 500,000 square feet of
well equipped buildings.” The number of engineering students

surpassed even the number of students in medicine and law. When it
threatened to exceed the enrollment of the university’s largest school,
the Literary College, Dean Cooley grew excited, and “with his
characteristic chuckle, exclaimed [to Professor Harvey Goulding], ‘By
Jove, Goulding, we’ll pass them yet.’ ” Urbane, well-traveled, and
politically savvy, Cooley had first come to the University of Michigan
on a Navy billet, as Professor of Steam Engineering and Iron
Shipbuilding. Four years later, the Navy allowed him to resign his
commission, and the university offered him a proper professorship.
In 1895, the then-dean of the engineering school, Charles Greene,
had been asked to create plans for a new building to house the
school’s growing student body. Greene’s request—$50,000 for a small,
U-shaped structure—was granted. He died before he could carry out
the construction, and Cooley succeeded him as dean. Asked to judge
his

predecessor’s

plans

and

funding

needs,

Cooley

replied,

“Gentlemen, if you could but see the other engineering colleges with
which we are forced to compete, you would not hesitate for one
moment to appropriate a quarter of a million dollars.” Something
about Cooley’s understated certainty swayed the board, and his
request was swiftly approved.
A public exhibition in 1913 showcased the spoils of the expansion,
as close as a university has probably come to something like a world’s
fair. Ten thousand people came to tour the facilities and take in the
latest technological marvels. Electrical engineers sent messages over a
primitive wireless system. Mechanical engineers “surprised their

visitors by sawing wood with a piece of paper running at 20,000
revolutions per minute, freezing flowers in liquid air, and showing a
bottle supported only by two narrow wires from which a full stream of
water flowed—a mystery solved by few.” Two full torpedoes, two large
cannons, and “a complete electric railway with a block signal system”
rounded out the demonstrations. “For the average student as well as
for the casual visitor, the Engineering corner of the Campus held
mysteries almost as profound as the deeper mysteries of the Medical
School,” observed one writer.
Cooley’s project to expand the engineering college changed the
university’s core educational program, as well. Eight years before
Shannon was born, the college began teaching courses in the theory
of

wireless

telegraphy

and

telephony,

meeting

the

growing

commercial need for engineers trained in wireless transmission.
Engineering’s rising profile began to draw the attention of deans in
other quarters of the university, and disciplinary lines began to blur.
By the time Shannon began his dual degrees in mathematics and
engineering, a generation later, the two curricula had largely merged
into one.
That appealed to Shannon, who admitted that his choice of a dual
degree wasn’t part of a grand design for his career; it was simply
adolescent indecision. “I wasn’t really quite sure which I liked best,”
he recalled. Earning two degrees instead of one wasn’t particularly
onerous: “It was quite easy to do because so much of the curriculum
was overlapping. I think you needed two extra courses and some

summer school to get degrees in both fields,” said Shannon. Those
studies gave him his first taste of communication engineering, which
he found “especially to my liking” for its blend of practice and theory
—because it was “the most mathematical, I would say, of the
engineering sciences.”
Though the dual degree was common enough, Shannon’s variety of
indecision, which he never entirely outgrew, would prove crucial to
his later work. Someone content to build things might have been
happy with a single degree in engineering; someone drawn more to
theory might have been satisfied with studying math alone. Shannon,
mathematically and mechanically inclined, could not make up his
mind, but the result left him trained in two fields that would prove
essential to his later successes.

He joined Radio Club, Math Club, even the gymnastics team.
Shannon’s records of leadership during this time are two. One is his
stint as secretary of the Math Club. “A feature of all meetings,” a
journal recorded, “was a list of mathematical problems placed on the
board and discussed informally after the regular program. A
demonstration of mathematical instruments in the department’s
collection made an interesting program.” The other was news enough
that the hometown paper saw fit to print it as an item of note: “Claude
Shannon has been made a non-commissioned officer in the Reserve
Officers Training Corps at the University of Michigan.”

In the Engineering Buildings, where Claude spent the bulk of his
time, his classmates tried the strength of shatterproof windshield
glass, worked to muffle milk-skimming machines, floated model
battleships on a sunless indoor model sea. But the real life on campus
was outside the classroom.
In the spring of 1934, Claude’s sophomore year, an unusually
misanthropic editor got a hold of the yearbook’s anonymous comedy
section and turned it into an account of student life narrated by an
escaped mental patient convinced he’s an anthropologist:
Breakfast at the dining hall: “The stories of last week-ends
parties assume a fundamental sameness . . . ‘We went to ______’s
(dance

hall,

night

club,

apartment,

or

fraternity)

and

had______highballs,______beers and______shots of______. After
the party______got sick and______and I had to carry him all the
way from______to______.’ ”
Someone spills his glass of orange juice on a coed’s lap, and
everyone laughs for five minutes, until they forget what they’re
laughing about and go silent again. “It is very quiet now. . . . The
business of laughing seems to have taken something out of every
one.” Breakfast breaks up at eleven and they spend the rest of the
morning going through the motions of hilarity.
Yearbook blurbs on the big men on campus were usually a string of
mild in-jokes, but there was some acid to them in the spring of 1934.
There is the track star who each night “removes his legs (they being in

some wise attached to his body) and places them in a gold and glass
case for all and sundry to admire.” The student politician, “parading
down State street with seven stooges at his heels, well fortified from
contradiction or blasphemy.” The newspaper editor, “wistfully
pounding a typewriter in the secrecy of his cupboard office,
attempting to veil the fact that he has nothing to veil.”
Claude, by contrast, was a small man on campus. But he and the
editor may have had a hunch in common: the introverted suspicion
that they are surrounded by animate machines, detachable parts and
all, all surface and funny motions. It takes a cynic or an engineer to
discover “the business of laughing.” Later on, a girlfriend remembered
Claude’s own laugh: “He laughed in small explosions as though he
were coughing, and had never quite learned how to be merry.” It was
his own funny motion of diaphragm and throat.

In the spring of Shannon’s sophomore year, a stroke ended his
father’s life. For fifteen months Claude Sr. had fought illnesses and
lived confined at home, his seventy-one years catching up with him.
In the days after his death, the town of Gaylord shut down in his
honor. The funeral was at the Shannon home at two o’clock on a
Tuesday afternoon; the pallbearers, Claude Sr.’s business associates,
were august. By Wednesday, Claude was on his way back to the
university.
Soon after his father’s death, something broke between Claude and
his mother. His sister was grown and gone, the town father was in the

ground, and Claude and Mabel were alone together for the first time.
It ended disastrously. It seems the rupture was caused, absurdly
enough, by a plate of cookies: she saved the good cookies for guests
and offered Claude only the burned ones. Whatever the cause, Claude
spent his remaining school vacations at an uncle’s. He and his mother
would barely interact for the rest of his life.

He completed his time as a student, distinguishing himself enough
to earn admission as a senior to both the Phi Kappa Phi and Sigma Xi
honor societies. In the spring of 1934, at the age of seventeen, Claude
Shannon claimed his first publication credit, on page 191 of the
American Mathematical Monthly. He had worked out the solution to a
math puzzle and landed a spot in the “Problems and Solutions”
section. The editors of the section welcomed “problems believed to be
new, and demanding no tools beyond those ordinarily furnished in the
first two years of college mathematics.” The problem Shannon solved
had appeared in the previous fall:
E 58 [1933, 491]. Proposed by R. M. Sutton, Haverford College, Pa.
In the following division of a three-place number into a five-place
number each digit has been replaced by a code letter. Assuming only
that the remainder, Y, is not zero, reconstruct the problem and show
that the solution is unique.

Coming as it did in the back of the journal, after the weightier work
of math papers and book reviews, Shannon’s six-part solution to the
problem was nothing notable—except for the fact that it existed at all,
a sign that his childhood fascination with codebreaking was starting
to pay adult dividends. Buoyed, we imagine, by this first success,
Shannon again submitted a solution and was again published in the
Monthly’s back pages, in January 1935, in answer to this problem:
E 100 [1934, 390]. Proposed by G. R. Livingston, State Teachers
College, San Diego, California.
In two concentric circles, locate parallel chords in the outer circle
which are tangent to the inner circle, by the use of compasses only,
finding the ends of the chords and their points of tangency.
Modest as they are, these early efforts are a window into the
education of Claude Shannon. We can infer from them that the
college-aged Shannon understood the value of appearing in a
professional public forum, one that would earn the scrutiny of
mathematicians his age and the attention of those older than him.
That he was reading such a journal at all hints at more than the usual
attention paid to academic matters; that his solutions were selected
points to more than the usual talent. Above all, his first publications
tell us something about his growing ambition: taking time out from

the usual burdens of classes and college life to study these problems,
work out the answers, and prepare them for publication suggests that
he already envisioned something other for himself than the family
furniture business.

His something other would begin, in earnest, with a typed
postcard tacked to an engineering bulletin board. It was an invitation
to come east and help build a mechanical brain. Shannon noticed it in
the spring of 1936, just as he was considering what was to come after
his undergraduate days were over. The job—master’s student and
assistant on the differential analyzer at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology—was tailor-made for a young man who could find equal
joy in equations and construction, thinking and building. “I pushed
hard for that job and got it. That was one of the luckiest things of my
life,” Shannon said later. Luck may have played a role, but the
application’s acceptance was also a testament to the keen eye of a
figure who would shape the rest of Shannon’s life and the course of
American science: Vannevar Bush.

3
The Room-Sized Brain
If you were searching for the origins of modern computing, you could
do worse than to start here: on Walnut Hill, just north and west of
Boston, in 1912, where an overdressed lawnmower man was trudging
up a grassy incline behind his machine. He took a moment to pose for
a grainy photo, hands on the tiller, eyes on his work, face turned from
us; the white of the grass, the black of his two-piece suit, the black of
the machine. You’d deduce in a second, of course, that its purpose is
something stranger than lawn care: the tall grass is untouched, and
where there ought to be blades there is a blank box, riding slung
between two bicycle wheels.
It was the failed first invention of a college senior, and though it
ran just as promised, it bored nearly everyone beyond its twenty-twoyear-old creator. Inside the box hung a pendulum, and a disc powered
by the back bicycle wheel. Resting on the disc were two rollers: one
measured vertical distance and wielded a pen, one measured
horizontal distance and turned the drum of paper beneath. It was a

geography machine, a device aimed to put land surveying teams out of
business.

Using

the

old

method,

heavy

on

telescopes

and

trigonometry, three men could cover three miles of ground per day,
and at day’s end, they’d have tables of data to convert into a crosssection picture of the land over which they’d slogged. The college
senior claimed that he, working alone, could nearly triple their speed
—and he did it by skipping straight to the picture. Inside the body of
his Profile Tracer was the lay of the land spooled on a rolling drum,
drawn in ink by a machine so accurate that if “it ran over a manhole
cover, it would duly plot the little bump.”
It earned a patent, and simultaneous bachelor’s and master’s
degrees for its creator, but little else. He made the corporate rounds
and failed to sell a single one, or even the license for the patent—his
cold letters unanswered, his pitch meetings over in minutes. And even
if he could have said, in a hypothetical moment of awesome
clairvoyance, “Look, in twenty years the guts of this lawnmower will
run the most powerful thinking machine that human hands have ever
built”—it would have sounded close to gibberish. But it would also
have been true.
The man in the black suit is Vannevar Bush, and this photo marks
his start. Pugnacious and perpetually time-strapped, grandson and
great-grandson of Yankee whaling captains, saddled with a name so
frustratingly hard to pronounce that he would instruct others to call
him “Van” or even “John”—the twenty-two-year-old inventor would

one day be, although he couldn’t possibly imagine it yet, the most
powerful scientist in America.
He would preside over a custom-made brain the size of a room. He’d
counsel presidents. He’d direct the nation’s scientists through World
War II with the same brusqueness with which he once imagined
unemploying two-thirds of the surveying profession. Collier’s
magazine would call him “the man who may win or lose the war”;
Time, “the general of physics.”
And not least among these accomplishments would be this: he’d be
the first to see Claude Shannon for who he was.

“Suppose,” said Vannevar Bush—two decades older, now a
doctor of engineering and vice president of MIT—“an apple drops
from a tree.” It’s just as well that he started with an example from the
high school physics chalkboard. Mathematically speaking, he was a
man of only moderate brain, “fourth or fifth echelon” by his own
admission. But he was blessed with brilliant hands. He’d been—like
Claude Shannon, his greatest student—a basement tinkerer from his
earliest memories. Much of his adult life was spent, it turned out,
building dogged, untiring mathematical brains of wood and metal,
brains that in some ways far outclassed his own—and that would
ultimately be the scene of Shannon’s first breakthrough.
“The thing we know about that apple,” Vannevar Bush continued,
“is, to a first approximation, that its acceleration is constant.” We can
plot its fall on the chalkboard in seconds. “But suppose we want to

include the resistance that air offers to the fall. This just puts another
term in our equation but makes it hard to solve formally. We can still
very readily solve it on a machine. We simply connect together
elements, electrical or mechanical gadgets, that represent the terms of
the equation, and watch it perform.”
What is it about an apple in a physicist’s vacuum that needs only
pencil and paper, while an apple falling through the air of the real
world demands solution by gadget? Both falls, as Bush noted, can be
captured in differential equations—the equations at the heart of
calculus that represent continuous change. So first imagine the apple
falling on the head of, say, Isaac Newton (and it’s no coincidence that
the man who formulated the laws of gravitation also co-invented
calculus—without equations that capture change over time, there’s no
making sense of gravity). In a vacuum, the apple falls 9.8 meters per
second faster, each second, until it concusses Newton.
But now drop the apple on Newton in the open air. Gravity’s force,
of course, doesn’t change. But the faster the apple falls, the greater
the resistance of the air pushing back against it. The apple’s
acceleration now depends on both the gravity speeding it up and the
air resistance slowing it down, which in turn depends on the apple’s
speed at any moment, which in turn is changing every fraction of a
second. That is the kind of problem that calls for a more-thanordinary brain.
How fast can a population of animals grow before it crashes? How
long before a heap of radioactive uranium decays? How far does a

magnet’s force extend? How much does a massive sun curve time and
space? To ask any of these questions is to ask for the solution to a
differential equation.
Or, of special interest to Bush and his electrical engineering
colleagues: How great a power surge could the nation’s electrical grids
tolerate before they failed? Given all the wealth and work it had taken
to electrify America, it was a multimillion-dollar question. In the
1920s, reflected one of Bush’s graduate students, transmitting power
from state to state was like “the towing of one car by another with a
long elastic cable stretched almost to the breaking point. Under these
conditions, any mishap, such as a short circuit or a sudden adding of
load, would in effect snap the towing cable.” By 1926, engineers had
discovered the equations that could predict the cable’s snapping
point. The catch was that solving these power equations meant a long
and error-prone slog: doing calculus by hand, graphing the results by
hand, finding the area covered by the graphs by tracing their outline
with a rolling mathematician’s tool called a planimeter, and then
inserting the area figures into further equations—all of which meant
that the lights would flicker and die long before the work was done.
It turned out that most differential equations of the useful kind—
the apple-falling-in-the-real-world kind, not the apple-falling-down-achalkboard kind—presented just the same impassable problem. These
were not equations that could be solved by formulas or shortcuts,
only by trial and error, or intuition, or luck. To solve them reliably—to
bring the force of calculus to bear on the industrial problems of power

transmission or telephone networks, or on the advanced physics
problems of cosmic rays and subatomic particles—demanded an
intelligence of another order.

By the time Bush and his students set to work, scientists had been
after such a brain for two generations. Long before it was needed to
stabilize the electrical grid, it was sought for a much more ancient
problem: predicting the ocean tides. For sailors, tide knowledge
dictated when to come into harbor, where to fish, and even when to
launch invasions. If little fishing boats could rely on guesswork and
memory, the iron-sided, steam-belching ships of the nineteenth
century required something more precise. And there was no precision
to be had in simply looking at high-tide marks and waiting for the sea
to repeat itself, because the simple model of Newton’s airless world—
moon and sun tugging on the water at each day’s appointed times—
fell into seeming chaos when confronted with the reality of each
shoreline’s special shape and each seabed’s unseen slope. From the
God’s-eye view, there is a law of tides; from our earthbound view, only
some petty local ordinances.
But a half century after Newton, mathematicians found that the
most chaotic-seeming fluctuations—from stock prices to tide charts—
could be broken down and represented as the sum of much simpler
functions, wavelike patterns that did indeed repeat themselves.
Anarchy concealed order; or rather, anarchy was dozens of kinds of

order happening at once, all shouting to be heard over one another. So
how to find the order in the tides?
In 1876, the wizard-bearded Scots-Irish physicist William Thomson
—later ennobled as Lord Kelvin, a name he took from the river that
flowed by his laboratory—proposed to do it by machine. At
Thomson’s Cambridge graduation exam, the professor questioning
him leaned over to his colleague and whispered, “You and I are just
about fit to mend his pens.” From his days in school, he’d kept as a
personal motto some lines from Alexander Pope: “Go, wondrous
creature! mount where Science guides; / Go measure earth, weigh air,
and state the tides.” And while the poet surely meant to speak to Man
in the aggregate, Thomson could hardly be blamed if he ever imagined
that he himself was the creature addressed.
Thomson’s tidal solution was something like the inverse of Bush’s
lawnmower. The surveying machine would read the land’s data of hills
and dips and even manhole covers and output a graph; the tide
machine invented by Thomson and his brother, which they
christened the harmonic analyzer, took a graph as input. The operator
stood before a long, open wooden box resting on eight legs, a steel
pointer and a hand crank protruding from its innards. With his right
hand, he took hold of the pointer and traced a graph of water levels,
months’ data on high tides and low; with his left, he steadily turned
the crank that turned the oiled gears in the casket. Inside, eleven little
cranks rotated at their own speeds, each isolating one of the simple
functions that added up to the chaotic tide. At the end, their gauges

displayed eleven little numbers—the average water level, the pull of
the moon, the pull of the sun, and so on—that together filled in the
equation to state the tides. All of it, in principle, could be ground out
by human hands on a notepad—but, said Thomson, this was
“calculation of so methodical a kind that a machine ought to be found
to do it.”
And so it had been. With the equation extracted from the surf, a
tide table was no longer just a record of the past, but a promise of the
future. Draw the table as a graph; feed the graph into the harmonic
analyzer; and finally, use the analyzer’s readings to custom-rig
Thomson’s next invention, a fifteen-pulley mechanical calculator the
size of a wardrobe that drew, with pen and ink, its own graph of tide
levels for the year to come. In 1876, the tide predictor could
accurately draw a year’s worth of the future in four hours; by 1881, it
took twenty-five minutes.
It was politely received and politely shunted aside. Even in 1881,
few practical equations were susceptible to mechanical solution, so it
seemed wiser to go on paying pencil-pushers than to mass-produce a
device with such a limited scope. Perhaps, too, Thomson’s fellow
mathematicians took offense at the thought that any part of their
work could be automated as easily as the labor of a factory hand. Most
important, though Thomson conceived of a truly versatile problemsolving machine, the crucial component was effectively missing until
world war brought a new impetus to the search.

So imagine, now, not a ship coming into harbor with the tide, but a
dreadnought rolling on a choppy sea, readying its guns to lob an
explosive shell at a moving target more than ten miles over the
horizon. Imagine a sea battle between two floating arsenals that would
remain, until the very end, mutually invisible. At that distance, the
pitch of the waves, the density of the air at each level of the
projectile’s trajectory, the curvature of the earth, even the earth’s
rotation during the time of the shell’s flight would all conspire to
determine whether that shell would hit water or steel. Each of those
factors formed a variable in—again—a differential equation. A naval
battle at that range was not simply a gunfight, but a mathematical
race (in which the reward for second place was often a watery grave).
In the First World War’s largest naval engagement, the Battle of
Jutland, in 1916, every British ship but one steamed into battle with
human-directed guns. They hit only 3 percent of their targets; they
lost more than 6,000 men. With those stakes, a reliable equationsolving machine was suddenly worth the cost.
It was Hannibal Ford, a mechanical engineer from upstate New
York, who supplied Thomson’s missing part. He’d gotten his start
taking apart watches and clocks, and then moved on to work on
typewriters. Where Thomson chose as his college watchword an
heroic couplet from Pope, Ford’s page in the Cornell yearbook had an
earthier motto: “I would construct a machine to do any old thing in
any old way.” The machine he had constructed by 1917 automated a
key step in the solution of differential equations: it found integrals, or

the area under curves (including the curve of a shell in flight). Long
before electronics, it could all be done mechanically. In the case of
Ford’s integrator—nicknamed the “Baby Ford” by grateful American
sailors—two ball bearings rested on the surface of a flat, spinning disc.
They were free to move continuously across the disc’s surface: the
farther from the center, the faster they’d spin. The distance from the
center stood for the shape of the equation’s curve, and the speed of
their spinning stood for the answer. The ball bearings turned a
cylinder that powered the rest of the machine and transmitted the
answer, through gears and gauges, to the gunners. Given inputs
including the speed and course of the attacking ship and the enemy
ship, the Baby Ford would generate the range to the target, the
direction for fire, and the time the shell would be in the air. These, in
turn, would dictate the angle of the guns.
Hannibal Ford was not the first to imagine such a machine. But his
machine was among the first to find integrals reliably, let alone
belowdecks on a ship tossed by waves and shaken by exploding shells,
when a slip of a ball bearing from its orbit would send the crew back
to the days of spyglasses and intuition. It was, said Vannevar Bush, “a
marvel of precision and completeness.” Soon Bush would run six of
them at once—and he’d set them to search not just for the pitch of a
gun, but for the shapes of atoms and the structures of suns.

Thomson’s harmonic analyzer, Ford’s integrator, Bush’s
Profile Tracer: conceived in isolation from one another, single-

purpose machines built to answer only one specialized question
apiece, they still had a crucial quality in common. They were all
working models of the physical world—of the slope of a hill or the fall
of a shell—simplified down to the essence. They were all, in a way,
bare-bones miniatures of the processes they described; they were, in
other words, resolutely analog. But it was Vannevar Bush who brought
analog computing to its highest level, a machine for all purposes, a
landmark on the way from tool to brain. And it was Claude Shannon
who, in a genius accident, helped obsolete it.
Bush would later recognize his computer’s precedents in Thomson
and Ford. But when he first set to work in the mid-1920s, searching
for a way to shrink America’s power network to the size of his lab, he
was largely ignorant of his analog forebears. Where, then, did he start?
In a sense, he started as a teacher. As well as an inventor, Bush was
an instructor of young engineers at a time when MIT’s electrical
engineering department was coming into national prominence. Fall in
Cambridge, Massachusetts, would begin with an auditorium full of
bright freshmen, slacks pressed and hair freshly combed, sitting
stunned as Bush punctured their self-regard. He would rise at the
lectern, hold up a simple pipe wrench, and offer a simple challenge:
“Describe this.”
One by one the freshmen would take their shot, and one by one
their descriptions were dismantled: Bush would show how each
definition was so vague that it could apply to any number of

wrenches, not this wrench in front of them. And he would conclude
by reading out the exact and correct patent application:
By turning the nut to the right or left the movable jaw may be
moved either toward or away from the fixed jaw, as may be
desirable. The inner face of the movable jaw is formed at a right
angle to its shank, and is also provided with a series of teeth,
which pitch or rake on its fellow jaw. . . . The sliding or movable
jaw [may] be projected outward so as to stand at an outward
inclination with respect to the other jaw, in order to enable the
jaws to be readily applied to a pipe. . . .
And so on.
The point was precision. In particular, the point was rigor in
reducing the hard, solid world—the wrench—into symbols so exact—
the patent application—that one could be flawlessly translated from
the other. Given the pipe wrench, produce the words for that wrench
and no other; given the words, produce the wrench. That, Bush taught
his students, was the beginning of engineering.
For the same reason—rigor in symbolizing the world—every
engineer was taught to draw. Leave pure numbers for pure
mathematicians—engineers would learn math with their hands. “A
man learns to use the Calculus as he learns to use the chisel or the
file,” said one reformer who helped give engineering education its
practical bent in the early century. A math laboratory of that era was
“well-stocked with clay, cardboard, wire, wooden, metal and other

models and materials”—and with graph paper, which was only about
as old as Bush was. At Bush’s MIT, math and engineering were an
extension of the metal shop and the woodshop, and students who
were skilled with the planimeter and the slide rule had to be skilled as
well with the soldering iron and the saw. There is perhaps a source
here for engineers’ persistent status anxiety, “uncertain always where
they fit,” as the great critic Paul Fussell put it, “whether with boss or
worker, management or labor, the world of headwork or the world of
handwork.” But there was also the conviction that handwork was
headwork, as long as the translations had precision. Given precision,
an equation could be grasped and solved in pictures and motion, just
as a wrench could be pinned down by the right words.
Working with a mechanic to build his early analog computers, Bush
came to see just how thoroughly calculus could be learned by hand:
“He had learned the calculus in mechanical terms,” Bush explained, “a
strange approach, and yet he understood it. That is, he did not
understand it in any formal sense, but he understood the
fundamentals; he had it under his skin.”
In the whirring of their integrators and the turning of their gears,
Bush’s machines embodied calculus. Like good engineers, they took
drawings as input and gave drawings as output. They might have
happened anywhere—but it’s hardly surprising that they were pieced
together in an engineering department.

By 1924, Bush and his students had built an integrating machine
that improved on Ford’s. By 1928, in search of the solution to a stable
grid, they were able to model 200 miles of power lines in a fiftysquare-foot lab. The same year, work started on an all-purpose analog
computer: the differential analyzer. When it was finished, three years
and $25,000 later, it was a brain the size of a room, a metal calculus
machine that could whir away at a problem for days and nights on end
before it ground to a halt. One problem, which measured the effects
of the earth’s magnetic field on cosmic rays, took thirty weeks of
spinning gears—but when it was done, the differential analyzer had
solved, by brute force, equations so complex that even trying to
attack them with human brainpower would have been pointless.
Indeed, Bush’s lab now owned the computational power to turn from
the problems of industry to some of the fundamental questions of
physics.
“It was a fearsome thing of shafts, gears, strings, and wheels rolling
on disks,” said an MIT physicist who turned to the differential
analyzer to study the behavior of scattering electrons, “but it worked.”
It was an enormous wooden frame latticed with spinning rods,
resembling a giant’s 100-ton foosball set. At the input end were six
draftsman’s tables, where the machine read the equations it was to
evaluate, much like Thomson’s analyzer read a graph of the tides. The
operators turned hand cranks that sent the machine’s pointers over a
hand-drawn graph of the equation to be analyzed: “for example,” read
one contemporary account, “in calculating the scattering of electrons

by an atom, it is necessary to supply the machine with the relation
between the potential of the atomic field and the distance from the
centre of the atom.” In this way, the details of the equation were
communicated

to

the

machine’s

internal

shafts.

Each

shaft

represented a variable (the current in a power line, or the size of an
atomic nucleus); the greater the variable, the faster the shaft spun.
These, in turn, drove integrators like Ford’s: A flat disc spun in place,
and standing perpendicular on the disc was an integrating wheel. The
farther the operators had placed the wheel from the center of the
disc, the faster it turned. The wheel was linked to five more
integrators of identical construction. At the very end, the speed of the
integrating wheels drove a pencil that moved up and down as the
graph paper underneath it unwound at a continuous rate. The
question was a graph, and at the end, after days or even months of
revolutions, the answering graph appeared.
The mathematics were infinitely more complex—but Vannevar
Bush’s lawnmower might have recognized in this calculating room a
distant descendant. The differential analyzer, wrote one science
historian, “still interpreted mathematics in terms of mechanical
rotations, still depended on expertly machined wheel-and-disc
integrators, and still drew its answers as curves. Differential equations
and contours of elevation—Bush’s computers were very much the
offspring of the early Profile Tracer.”
This was the computer before the digital revolution: a machine that
literally performed equations in the process of solving them. As long

as the machine was acting out the equations that shape an atom, it
was, in a meaningful sense, a giant atom; as long as it was acting out
the equations that fuel a star, it was a miniature star. “It is an analogue
machine,” said Bush. “When one has a problem before him, say the
problem of how a bridge that has not been built will sway in a gusty
wind, he proceeds to make a combination of mechanical or electrical
elements which will act in exactly the same manner as the bridge—
that is, will obey the same differential equations.” For the physicist or
engineer, two systems that obey the same equations have a kind of
identity—or at least an analogy. And that, after all, is all our word
analog means. A digital watch is nothing like the sun; an analog watch
is the memory of a shadow’s circuit around a dial.
The computer clacked and hummed and scribbled away, spinning
out its analogies, and when it ran through the night, Bush’s students
kept watch by its side in shifts, ears tuned for the sound of a wheel
slipping its orbit. On the nights when it all ran smoothly, they
struggled to stay awake in the humming room. And so passed five
years.

4
MIT
Claude Shannon was, at least, acquainted with the cold. The wind
that blew off the Atlantic was saltier than Michigan’s but no more
chilling; the New England snow was almost as deep. Twenty years old,
displaced from the Midwest for the first time, and alone, surely he
would have taken the familiar where he could find it. For those unable
to bear the cold, though, MIT offered corridors and tunnels, long
expanses painted in Institutional Gray. The engineers could spend an
entire winter indoors. They could virtually live in the gray tunnels,
and there were many days that Shannon never saw sun—with the
special exception of “MIThenge,” the two winter days each year when
the sun aligned with the axis of the corridors, and lit the gray walls
gold as it set.
“Institute folklore has it that an alert eye can sometimes pick out
pencil lines on the corridor walls, shoulder high and parallel to the
floor,” writes MIT historian Fred Hapgood. “These are supposed to be
the spoor of members of the community so adapted to the corridors

that they can navigate them blind . . . press a pencil against the wall,
roll their eyeballs up into their heads, go out-of-body after some
complex problem, and wheel away on automatic pilot.” On greener
days, a walk outside would take Shannon past columned facades
chiseled with the names of the greats: Archimedes, Copernicus,
Newton, Darwin. MIT was a neoclassical island in what was still an
industrial Boston suburb, and the Pantheon-style dome at its center
sat as an uneasy neighbor to the factories and mills along the Charles
River. The dome sitting atop tunnels was itself a compromise between
architects: one who wanted the new campus to bear at least some
comparison to that other college up the river, and another who
insisted that it be built on the principles of “efficiency and avoidance
of lost motion by student and teacher, equal to that which obtains in
our best industrial works.” This was MIT’s place in the world, in
miniature: an adjunct to industry with aspirations to “purer” science—
both factory and dome.
The buildings themselves were a tribute to the quantitative
mindset, known more by number than by name. It was a postcard
about Bush’s analyzer that brought Shannon to Building 13, and it was
Bush who approved his application and offered him admission to the
graduate program. Both were engineers in a hurry. The better to get on
with the work of earning money and supporting a family, Bush had
managed simultaneous undergraduate and graduate degrees; Shannon
had finished high school in three years, two BS degrees in four, and
now was on to graduate work with barely a summer’s pause. It was a

sign of Bush’s regard for his new pupil that he placed him in charge of
the analyzer’s most advanced and most finicky part.
By 1935, a year before Shannon arrived in Cambridge, the
differential analyzer had reached its limits. Mechanical contraption
that it was, with each new equation it had to be deconstructed and
reassembled again. What Bush and his team had built was not so
much a single machine as a huge array of machines in outline, to be
rebuilt for every problem and broken down at every solution. It was
versatility at the cost of efficiency; and because the analyzer’s entire
mission was to bring efficiency to computations that could at least in
theory be worked out by human hands, these recurring bottlenecks
compromised its whole reason for being.
In response, Bush dreamed of an analyzer that could essentially
reassemble itself on the fly: one with automatic controls enabling it to
turn from equation to equation without pausing, or even to solve
multiple interacting equations simultaneously. Switches would take
over the work of screwdrivers. At a time when Bush’s ambitions far
exceeded MIT’s Depression-era budget, he was still able to secure
$265,000 from the private philanthropists at the Rockefeller
Foundation to develop this next-generation computer. And he
brought Claude Shannon to MIT to help him run it.
So for the next three years, Shannon’s world was gray corridors and
the walls of the humming room: and within that room, the walls of a
little box of 100 switches closing and opening, fastened to the
analyzer, a world within a world. In the box were the brains of the

brain, the switches and relays that now controlled the machine and
rebuilt it as it spun, each relay, writes James Gleick, “an electrical
switch controlled by electricity (a looping idea).” Open. Close. Weeks
and months of this.

What happened when Claude Shannon flipped a switch? Think
of a switch or relay as a drawbridge for an electrical current: closed,
the switch would allow the current to pass on to its destination; open,
the switch would stop the current in its tracks. The destination might
be another relay, which would then open or close on the basis of the
input it received—or it might, in the easiest example, be something as
simple as a little electric light. All of this was second nature to
Shannon, from as far back as the Gaylord Western Union office and
his barbed-wire network. And it was systematized for him in Ann
Arbor, where he dutifully drew circuit diagrams along with the rest of
the electrical engineers. Series: the current has to pass through both
of two switches before it illuminates the light; parallel: the current is
free to pass through either, or both.
These were the blocks that comprised the hundred-switch logic box
attached to the differential analyzer, or the electric guts of assembly
lines, or the million-relay system that controlled the nation’s
telephone network. There were circuits built to transmit a current
when two switches were closed, but not zero or one or three; there
were circuits drawn as branching trees or symmetrical deltas or dense
meshes, an entire electric geometry that Shannon had learned by

heart. And, in the old tradition of engineers, it was all rigged by hand,
drawn step by step on blackboards or just soldered together in the
belly of the machine, the only proof of the circuit’s rightness in the
tangible results: whether the call went through, whether the wheel
spun edgewise on its disc, whether the light lit. Circuits before
Shannon were like differential equations before the analog computer:
errors for every trial until the errors stopped, and nothing any cleaner.
Building circuits in those days was an art, with all the mess and falsestarting and indefinable intuition that “art” implies.
But here was Shannon shut in a room with a machine built to
automate thought—built, in the name of industry and efficiency,
to remove the art from math. And in the midst of his work, he came to
understand that he knew another way of automating thought, one
that would ultimately prove far more powerful than the analog
machine.

How is logic like a machine? Here is how one logician explained it
around the turn of the twentieth century: “As a material machine is
an instrument for economising the exertion of force, so a symbolic
calculus

is

an

instrument

for

economising

the

exertion

of

intelligence.” Logic, just like a machine, was a tool for democratizing
force: built with enough precision and skill, it could multiply the
power of the gifted and the average alike.
In the 1930s, there were only a handful of people in the world who
were skilled in both “symbolic calculus,” or rigorous mathematical

logic, and the design of electric circuits. This is less remarkable than it
sounds: before the two fields melded in Shannon’s brain, it was hardly
thought that they had anything in common. It was one thing to
compare logic to a machine—it was another entirely to show that
machines could do logic.
In Michigan, Shannon had learned (in a philosophy class, no less)
that any statement of logic could be captured in symbols and
equations—and that these equations could be solved with a series of
simple, math-like rules. You might prove a statement true or false
without ever understanding what it meant. You would be less
distracted, in fact, if you chose not to understand it: deduction could
be automated. The pivotal figure in this translation from the vagaries
of words to the sharpness of math was a nineteenth-century genius
named George Boole, a self-taught English mathematician whose
cobbler father couldn’t afford to keep him in school beyond the age of
sixteen. Not long before Thomson conceived of his first analyzer,
Boole had proven himself a prodigy with a book that fully earned its
presumptuous title: The Laws of Thought. Those laws, Boole showed,
are founded on just a few fundamental operations: for instance, AND,
OR, NOT, and IF.
Say we’d like to designate all the people in London who are blueeyed and left-handed. Call the property of blue eyes x, and call the
property of left-handedness y. Use multiplication to stand for AND,
addition to stand for OR, and a simple apostrophe (in lieu of a minus
sign) to stand for NOT. Remember that the goal of all this is to prove

statements true or false; so let 1 stand for “true,” and 0 for “false.”
Those are all the rudiments for turning logic into math.
So the set of all Londoners who are both blue-eyed and left-handed
simply becomes xy. And the set of all Londoners who are either blueeyed or left-handed becomes x + y. Imagine, then, that we want to
evaluate the truth of the statement, “This particular Londoner is a
blue-eyed left-hander.” Its truth depends on the truth of x and y. And
Boole set out the precepts for assigning the statement a 1 or a 0 given
what we know about x and y:
0•0=0
0•1=0
1•0=0
1•1=1
It’s easy to translate those equations back into English. If the
Londoner is neither blue-eyed nor left-handed, the statement we’re
trying to evaluate is of course false. If the Londoner is only blue-eyed
or only left-handed, the statement is again false. Only if the Londoner
is both does the statement become true. In other words, the operator
AND only gives “true” if all of the propositions it’s operating on are
true.
But Boolean algebra is more than a rehash of ordinary math.
Imagine now that we want to evaluate the statement, “This particular
Londoner is blue-eyed or left-handed.” In that case, we get the
following:

0+0=0
0+1=1
1+0=1
1+1=1
If the Londoner is neither blue-eyed nor left-handed, the statement
is false. But if he is blue-eyed, or left-handed, or both, it’s true—so in
Boole’s algebra, 1 + 1 equals 1. The operator OR gives true if any
proposition it’s operating on is true, or if all are. (Boole also recognized
another kind of “or,” called the exclusive-or, which only gives true if
one or the other proposition is true, but not both.)
From these simple elements (as simple as switches, Shannon
reflected) we can build our way to progressively more complicated
results. For instance, we can prove that x + xy = x, or that the truthvalue of the statement “either x, or both x and y” depends solely on
the truth of x. Or we can prove that (x + y)’ = x’y’: in other words, “x or
y” is false when “both not-x and not-y” is true, and vice versa. This,
Boole argued, is all there is of logic. X and y, and as many other
variables as we choose, can stand for whatever statements we want, as
long as they’re either true or false—and with the simple, nearly
mindless operation of a few rules, we can deduce from them
everything that can be deduced. A mechanical logic means no more
puzzling over “All men are mortal, Socrates is a man . . .” and so on:
nothing but symbols, operations, and rules. It took a genius to lay
down the rules, but it would only take a child to apply them. Or
something simpler than a child.

It was all very interesting, but for nearly a century little that was
practical came of it. It was taught to generations of students mainly as
a philosopher’s curiosity, and so it was taught to Claude Shannon. At
the time, he said, he mainly enjoyed it for the sound of the word:
“Boooooooolean.” But something of it stayed with him as he struggled
to make sense of the hundred-switch box; something of Boole’s
simplicity stood out alongside the devilishly complex equations he
was solving for Bush. Close, open. Yes, no. 1, 0.
Something of it stayed with him, too, as he made his way from MIT
to New York for the summer of 1937. If one other group of people in
the world was edging closer to thinking simultaneously about logic
and circuits, it was the minds at Bell Laboratories, who had taken
Shannon on for a summer internship. Only a temporary hire, Shannon
was likely occupied with the ordinary duties assigned to interim help,
and his 1937 summer left no marks in the Labs’ records. But he
brought to the Labs a deep sense of mathematical logic and a betterthan-average knowledge of circuit design—and the nagging feeling
that the two were connected. He brought them, moreover, to the heart
of the phone company, the owner of the most complicated, farreaching network of circuits in existence, and his work was part of the
mathematical effort to make that network perform better and cost
less.
Crucially, it was around this time that he first put pen to paper and
began tying together the commonalities he sensed in Bush’s analyzer,
Bell’s network, and Boole’s logic. Half a century later, Shannon tried to

recall his moment of insight, and tried to explain how he could have
been the first to understand what the switches meant. He told a
journalist,
It’s not so much that a thing is “open” or “closed,” the “yes” or
“no” that you mentioned. The real point is that two things in
series are described by the word “and” in logic, so you would say
this “and” this, while two things in parallel are described by the
word “or.” . . . There are contacts which close when you operate
the relay, and there are other contacts which open, so the word
“not” is related to that aspect of relays. . . . The people who had
worked with relay circuits were, of course, aware of how to
make these things. But they didn’t have the mathematical
apparatus of the Boolean algebra.
Every single concept from Boole’s algebra had its physical
counterpart in an electric circuit. An on switch could stand for “true”
and an off switch for “false,” and the whole thing could be
represented in 1’s and 0’s. More important, as Shannon pointed out,
the logical operators of Boole’s system—AND, OR, NOT—could be
replicated exactly as circuits. A connection in series becomes AND,
because the current must flow through two switches successively and
fails to reach its destination unless both allow it passage. A
connection in parallel becomes OR, because the current can flow
through either switch, or both. The current flows through two closed
switches in parallel and lights a light; 1 + 1 = 1.

A leap from logic to symbols to circuits: “I think I had more fun
doing that than anything else in my life,” Shannon remembered
fondly. An odd and wonkish sense of fun, maybe—but here was a
young man, just twenty-one now, full of the thrill of knowing that he
had looked into the box of switches and relays and seen something no
one else had. All that remained were the details. In the years to come,
it would be as if he forgot that publication was something still
required of brilliant scientists; he’d pointlessly incubate remarkable
work for years, and he’d end up in a house with an attic stuffed with
notes, half-finished articles, and “good questions” on ruled paper. But
now, ambitious and unproven, he had work pouring out of him.

Finished in the fall of 1937, Shannon’s master’s thesis, “A
Symbolic Analysis of Relay and Switching Circuits,” was presented to
an audience in Washington, D.C., and published to career-making
applause the following year. In his new system, Shannon wrote in his
driest scientific prose,
any circuit is represented by a set of equations, the terms of the
equations corresponding to the various relays and switches of
the circuit. A calculus is developed for manipulating these
equations by simple mathematical processes, most of which are
similar to ordinary algebraic algorithms. This calculus is shown
to be exactly analogous to the calculus of propositions used in

the symbolic study of logic. . . . The circuit may then be
immediately drawn from the equations.
That was the key—after Shannon, designing circuits was no longer
an exercise in intuition. It was a science of equations and shortcut
rules. Consider a problem that Shannon’s colleagues might have faced
as they worked to subject their huge analog machine to electric
controls. Say that a certain function in the circuits would allow the
current to pass through—would output a “1,” in Shannon’s terms—
depending on the state of three different switches, x, y, and z. The
current would pass through if only z were switched on, or if y and z
were switched on, or if x and z were switched on, or if x and y were
switched on, or if all three were switched on. Through trial and error,
Shannon’s colleagues could sooner or later rig up eleven separate
connections that would do the job. But Shannon would start with
pencil and paper, and his ubiquitous writing pad. He would write out
the function in Boolean terms, like this:
x’y’z + x’yz + xy’z + xyz’ + xyz
Then he would boil it down. Two terms in that function feature yz,
and two feature y’z, so he would just factor them out as in any algebra
problem:
yz(x+x’) + y’z(x+x’) + xyz’

But Boole’s logic tells us that x + x’ is always true, which makes
sense: x is either true, or it isn’t. Shannon could recognize, then, that x
+ x’ wouldn’t really tell him anything interesting about the output of
the circuit, and so it could be safely crossed out:
yz + y’z + xyz’
Now two terms feature z, so Shannon could factor again:
z(y + y’) + xyz’
And for the same reason as before, he could cross out the terms in
parentheses:
z + xyz’
There was one more rule in Boole’s logic that could distill this even
further. Boole showed that x + x’y = x + y, or to put it into plain
English, asking for a Londoner who was either blue-eyed, or lefthanded but not blue-eyed, was just the same as asking for a Londoner
who was either blue-eyed or left-handed. Using that rule on the
function above, Shannon could cross out z’ as redundant, leaving him
with this:
z + xy
Remember the muck in which Shannon had started. His math was
able to prove that these two sets of instructions are exactly the same:

Turn on if only z is switched on, or if y and z are switched
on, or if x and z are switched on, or if x and y are switched
on, or if all three are switched on.
Turn on if z is switched on, or if x and y are switched on.
In other words, he had discovered a way to do the work of eleven
connections with just two, a parallel and a series. And he had done it
without ever touching a switch.
Armed with these insights, Shannon spent the rest of his thesis
demonstrating their possibilities. A calculator for adding binary
numbers; a five-button combination lock with electronic alarm—as
soon as the equations were worked out, they were as good as built.
Circuit design was, for the first time, a science. And turning art into
science would be the hallmark of Shannon’s career.
One more beauty of this system: as soon as switches are reduced to
symbols, the switches no longer matter. The system could work in any
medium, from clunky switches to microscopic arrays of molecules.
The only thing needed was a “logic” gate capable of expressing “yes”
and “no”—and the gate could be anything. The rules for easing the
labor of a room-sized mechanical computer are the same rules that
would be built into the circuits of vacuum tubes, transistors,
microchips—at every step, the binary logic of 0 and 1.
It was trivial, Shannon said. But it was the kind of discovery blessed
to be trivial only after the fact.

Still—“possibly the most important, and also the most famous,
master’s thesis of the century”? “One of the greatest master’s theses
ever”?

“The

most

important

master’s

thesis

of

all

time”?

“Monumental”? Was a series of time-saving tricks for engineers really
worth all of that praise? As long as the job was done either way, was it
really so crucial that Shannon could do in two steps what his
colleagues did in eleven?
It was crucial—but the most radical result of Shannon’s thesis was
largely implied, not stated, and its import only became clear with
time. The implication gets clearer when we realize that Shannon,
following Boole, treated the equal sign as a conditional: “if.”
1 + 1 = 1: if the current passes through two switches in parallel, a
light lights (or a relay passes on a signal meaning “yes”). 0 + 0 = 0: if
the current passes through neither of two switches in parallel, a light
fails to light (or a relay passes on a signal meaning “no”). Depending on
the input, the same switches could give two different answers. To take
an anthropomorphizing leap—a circuit could decide. A circuit could
do logic. Many circuits could do enormously complex logic: they could
solve logical puzzles and deduce conclusions from premises as reliably
as any human with a pencil, and faster. And because Boole had shown
how to resolve logic into a series of binary, true-false decisions, any
system capable of representing binaries has access to the entire
logical universe he described. “The laws of thought” had been
extended to the inanimate world.

That same year, the British mathematician Alan Turing published a
famously critical step toward machine intelligence. He had proven
that any solvable mathematical problem could, in principle, be solved
by machine. He had pointed the way toward computers that could
reprogram their own instructions as they worked, all-purpose
machines of a flexibility far beyond any that had yet been conceived.
Now, Shannon had shown that any sensical statement of logic could,
in principle, be evaluated by machine. Turing’s machine was still a
construct of theory: he proved his point with a hypothetical
“read/write head” operating on an arbitrarily long string of magnetic
tape—an imaginary computer with a single moving part. Shannon, on
the other hand, had proven the logical possibilities of the circuits that
could be found in any telephone switchboard: he had shown, “down to
the metal,” how engineers and programmers to come might one day
wire logic into a machine. This leap, writes Walter Isaacson, “became
the basic concept underlying all digital computers.”
It would be six more years before Turing and Shannon met in a
wartime scientists’ cafeteria, each of their projects so classified that
they could only speak of them in hints. They had barely begun to
build. Yet in one year, “an annus mirabilis of the computer age,” they
had laid the foundations. In particular, they had shown the
possibilities of digital computing, of minute, discrete decisions
arrayed one after the other. Less than a decade after Shannon’s paper,
the great analog machine, the differential analyzer, was effectively
obsolete, replaced by digital computers that could do its work literally

a thousand times faster, answering questions in real time, driven by
thousands of logic gates that each acted as “an all-or-none device.”
The medium now was vacuum tubes, not switches—but the design
was a direct descendant of Shannon’s discovery.

Yet none of this could have been foreseen in 1937 by Vannevar
Bush, planning ever more complex and capable versions of his
differential analyzer, or even by Claude Shannon. Beneath the thrum
of that remarkable machine, it all might have sounded, in a way, like
regress: that the finely engineered discs and gears were to be
superseded by switches no more complex in their essentials than a
telegraph key; that there was less analytic potential in the 100-ton
behemoth than in the small box fastened to its side; that machines so
solidly intuitive they could teach an unschooled mechanic calculus by
hand were to be replaced by opaque cabinets that gave a blank face to
the world. From Thomson to Bush, the analog computer was, in a way,
one of engineering’s long, blind alleys.
In that light, a story from Hapgood, the MIT historian: “Years ago an
engineer told me a fantasy he thought threw some light on the ends of
engineering, or at least on those underlying his own labors. A flying
saucer arrives on Earth and the crew starts flying over cities and dams
and canals and highways and grids of power lines; they follow cars on
the roads and monitor the emissions of TV towers. They beam up a
computer into their saucer, tear it down, and examine it. ‘Wow,’ one of
them finally exclaims. ‘Isn’t nature incredible!?’ ”

Indifferent to beauty as all but survival’s side effect, wildly
profligate, remorseless: nature and techne aren’t so different.

5
A Decidedly Unconventional Type of
Youngster
It’s been said that most of the great writers have bibliographies, not
biographies. The kind of life requisite to their work leaves little
behind but the words themselves. Even if we had the questionable
privilege of watching them scribble for hours every day, we’d find
more of who they were simply in the pages of their books. Something
similar might be said of Claude Shannon in this period, working with a
speed and absorption that he would not match for the rest of his life.
What can we recover of who he was from what he made?
Consider some thesis topics chosen by Shannon’s contemporaries
in MIT’s electrical engineering department: “Skin Effect Resistance
Ratio of a Circular Loop of Wire”; “An Investigation of Two Methods
of Measuring the Acceleration of Rotating Machinery”; “Three
Mechanisms of Breakdown of Pyrex Glass”; “A Plan for Remodeling an
Industrial Power Plant”; “A Proposal to Electrify a Section of the
Boston and Maine Railroad Haverhill Division.” All of these were

solidly and practically bound to the world of things. In the best
tradition of engineering, they found new uses for old materials, or
built physical systems to higher standards of efficiency and power.
Next to this good work, Shannon’s was different not only in degree
but in kind. He was a tinkerer to the end of his life, and he worked
with his hands long after he had any need to. But unlike other
tinkerers, he had a way of getting behind things. He loved the objects
under his hands, right up to the point when he abstracted his way
past them. Switches weren’t just switches, but a metaphor for math.
There had been legions of jugglers and unicycle riders in the world,
but few were as compelled as Shannon would be to fit those activities
to equations. Most important of all, he would abstract his way past all
of human communication, to the structure and form that every
message holds in common. In all these endeavors, he was
distinguished less by quantitative horsepower than by his mastery of
model making: the reduction of big problems to their essential core. In
banishing art and ambiguity, in finding the ways in which human
artifacts merely stood for mathematics, Shannon’s work at twentyone was a window on all the work he had left.
There are passionate scientists who are almost overcome by the
abundance of the world, who are gluttons for facts; and then there are
those who stand a step back from the world, their apartness a
condition of their work. Shannon was one of this latter kind: an
abstracted man. In his twenties—his most productive years—he took
his abstraction to the point of deep withdrawal and almost crippling

shyness. But an abstracted man might also have it in him to be playful
or funny—indeed, might be especially suited for that. To love the
things around us and yet to also see them as cheap stand-ins for the
real reality of numbers, theorems, and logic might, to the right
temperament, give the world the appearance of a permanent joke.
“What’s your secret in remaining so carefree?” an interviewer asked
Shannon toward the end of his life. Shannon answered, “I do what
comes naturally, and usefulness is not my main goal. . . . I keep asking
myself, How would you do this? Is it possible to make a machine do
that? Can you prove this theorem?” For an abstracted man at his most
content, the world isn’t there to be used, but to be played with,
manipulated by hand and mind. Shannon was an atheist, and seems to
have come by it naturally, without any crisis of faith; puzzling over
the origins of human intelligence with the same interviewer, he said
matter-of-factly, “I don’t happen to be a religious man and I don’t
think it would help if I were!” And yet, in his instinct that the world
we see merely stands for something else, there is an inkling that his
distant Puritan ancestors might have recognized as kin.

Something

in

Shannon—perhaps

just

this

withdrawn

unworldliness—seemed to trigger the protective instincts of others,
even from the generally unsentimental technicians of MIT. Rail-thin,
small-town, transparently brilliant; a face made of angles, and an
Adam’s apple too large for his neck: he must have looked like the kind
of young man always on the verge of being mugged or hit by a bus.

When he enrolled in a flying class in the wake of his thesis’s
publication, the MIT professor teaching the course immediately
marked him out as odd—odd even for Cambridge—and canvassed his
colleagues for their opinions. From his extracurricular investigations,
the flight instructor wrote in a letter to MIT’s president, “I am
convinced that Shannon is not only unusual but is in fact a neargenious [sic] of most unusual promise.” With the president’s
permission, he would ban Shannon from the cockpit: such a life
wasn’t worth risking in a crash.
Two days later, the president, physicist Karl Taylor Compton, sent
back a levelheaded reply: “Somehow I doubt the advisability of urging
a young man to refrain from flying or arbitrarily to take the
opportunity away from him, on the ground of his being intellectually
superior. I doubt whether it would be good for the development of his
own character and personality.”
So with the endorsement of the administration, Shannon kept
flying: like any other student, he was permitted to risk the contents of
his brain. He risked his in the flight school’s simple propeller crafts,
blades buzzing like an overgrown wasp, and he always came down
safely. A 1939 photo shows him standing beside a Piper Cub, a light
two-seater popular with flight schools. He’s incongruously well
dressed, his white collar well starched and his tie tightly knotted, and
he addresses the camera seriously as he rests his hand on the plane’s
propeller.

Those responsible for Shannon’s career were nearly as protective as
those responsible for his safety. Bush described him to a colleague as
“a decidedly unconventional type of youngster. . . . He is a very shy
and retiring sort of individual, exceedingly modest, and who would
readily be thrown off the track.” But even had it been clear that
Shannon’s thesis prophesied the end of the analog computing to
which his advisor had devoted a decade and a half, Bush was a teacher
and engineer large-spirited enough to recognize brilliance when he
saw it. As science writer William Poundstone notes, “Bush believed
Shannon to be an almost universal genius, whose talents might be
channeled in any direction.” More than that, Bush took it upon
himself to choose the direction.
Bush was, by the late 1930s, one of the most powerful figures in
American science, and Shannon was fortunate to have won him for an
advocate. The year Shannon’s thesis was published, Bush impressed
on him that mathematics, not electrical engineering, was the higherprestige field, and he sponsored Shannon’s acceptance into MIT’s
doctoral program for mathematics. At the same time, Bush’s influence
in the engineering world won Shannon’s thesis the unfortunately
named Alfred Noble Prize (unfortunately named, because this is the
point at which every writer mentioning it points out that it has no
relation to Alfred Nobel’s much more famous prize). Awarded by
America’s engineering societies for the best paper by a scholar under
thirty, the Noble meant early distinction within the field, an engraved
certificate, and a $500 stipend. It also meant some modest recognition

outside the field, including a brief notice—“YOUTHFUL INSTRUCTOR WINS
NOBLE AWARD”—on page 8 of the New York Times. Back in Michigan,
the Otsego County Herald Times hailed Shannon as a local boy made
good (on the front page, naturally).
When news of the award reached Shannon, he knew whom to
thank. “I have a sneaking suspicion that you have not only heard
about it but had something to do with my getting it,” Shannon wrote
to Bush. “If so, thanks a lot.”

Finally, Bush took it upon himself to find a suitable dissertation
project for Shannon in the field of—genetics. Genetics? It was at least
as plausible an object for Shannon’s talents as switches. Circuits could
be taught, genes could be taught—but the analytic skill it took to find
the logic beneath them seemed more likely to be inborn. Shannon had
already used his “queer algebra” to great effect on relays; “another
special algebra,” Bush explained to a colleague, “might conceivably
handle some of the aspects of Mendelian heredity.” More to the point,
it was a matter of deep conviction for Bush that specialization was the
death of genius. “In these days, when there is a tendency to specialize
so closely, it is well for us to be reminded that the possibilities of
being at once broad and deep did not pass with Leonardo da Vinci or
even Benjamin Franklin,” Bush said in a speech at MIT. “Men of our
profession—we teachers—are bound to be impressed with the
tendency of youths of strikingly capable minds to become interested
in one small corner of science and uninterested in the rest of the

world. . . . It is unfortunate when a brilliant and creative mind insists
upon living in a modern monastic cell.”
The words predate Shannon’s arrival in Cambridge, but they could
have easily expressed Bush’s ambitions for his student. And so
Shannon was to leave the monastic cell of the differential analyzer
(filled, like a monastery, with shifts of men keeping quiet watch at all
hours) and the even smaller cell of the circuit box, to go 200 miles
south to Cold Spring Harbor on Long Island, and to come back with a
dissertation. If any protest came from Shannon, it was not recorded.

6
Cold Spring Harbor
In the summer of 1939, then, Shannon arrived at one of the greatest
genetics laboratories in America, and one of the greatest scientific
embarrassments: the Eugenics Record Office. In 1910, when this
headquarters of the American eugenics movement opened its doors, it
was considered the cutting edge of progress in some circles to push
for the selective breeding of the “fittest families” and the sterilization
of the “defective classes.” Its founder had opined that “three or four
per cent of our population is a fearful drag on our civilization,” and its
longtime

director

even

mailed

state

legislators

custom-made

estimates of the number of “defectives” in their districts. By 1939, the
movement was dying, and the crimes of Nazi Germany—a regime that
took eugenicists as seriously as they took themselves—were the final
push into disrepute. (Chillingly enough, a Nazi poster from 1936
prominently featured the flag of the United States, along with those
of other nations that had adopted eugenics laws. The inscription read:
“WE DO NOT STAND ALONE.”) Somewhere on the list of Vannevar Bush’s

accomplishments, then, should be his role in killing American
eugenics. As president of the Carnegie Institution of Washington,
which funded the Eugenics Record Office, he forced its sterilizationpromoting director into retirement and ordered the office to close for
good on December 31, 1939.
But the poison tree bore some useful fruit. And Shannon was there,
in its last months, to collect what he could of it. Few scientists had
compiled better data on heredity and inheritance than eugenicists—in
some ways, eugenics are to modern genetics as alchemy is to
chemistry, the disreputable relative in the attic. Perhaps the best data
set of all belonged to the Eugenics Record Office, which had spent a
quarter century accumulating more than one million index cards
bearing information on human traits and family trees.
Many of those cards were the work of generations of field
researchers; many more were volunteered by the subjects themselves,
offered freely in return for advice on the fitness of their offspring. In
a massive, fireproof vault the cards stood in their files row after row:
traits of physiology (“biochemical deficiencies, color blindness,
diabetes”),

of

personality

(“lack

of

foresight,

rebelliousness,

trustworthiness, irritability, missile throwing, popularity, radicalness,
conservativeness, nomadism”), of social behavior (“criminality,
prostitution,

inherited

scholarship,

alcoholism,

patriotism,

‘traitorousness’ ”), and on and on. Each trait was coded like a book in a
library. Searching for chess-playing ability would take Shannon to file

4598: 4 for mental trait, 5 for general mental ability, 9 for gameplaying ability, and 8 for chess.
Mixed almost at random through this genetic Library of Babel was
good, hard data; junk (unreliable testimony of untrained volunteers;
exhaustive reports on circus freaks; “Midget Schedules”); and the
bastard mush in between. For an example of the latter, erring on the
side of junk, consider the observations of the office’s founder on
“thalassophilia,” or the genetic love of the sea that allegedly causes
sailing careers to be passed down through family trees: “Sometimes a
father who shows no liking for the sea . . . may carry a determiner for
sea-lust recessive. It is theoretically probable that some mothers are
heterozygous for love of the sea, so that when married to a
thalassophilic man half of their children will show sea-lust and half
will not.”
While Vannevar Bush might have appreciated this line of thought,
descended as he was from several generations of thalassophilic sea
captains, much of the junk here lies in the simple-minded assumption
that such a complex trait, if it had any basis in genetics at all, could be
controlled by a single gene. But this was the murk in which the study
of genetics found itself without serious math, and with still more than
a decade to go until the spiral staircase of DNA first appeared under
biologists’ X-rays. Pending the proof, Shannon wrote, we can only
speak “as though the genes actually exist.” More to the point, without
the application of statistics and probability to huge numbers of traits
across entire populations, genetics would fail to account for anything

more interesting than the height of pea plants or the shape of rooster
combs. Eugenicists would be stuck in fruitless, and dangerous,
speculations about the gene for sea-lust or for traitorousness. In
Shannon’s childhood, scientists like J. B. S. Haldane, Ronald Fisher,
and Sewall Wright had begun to train the big guns of statistics on
biology, effecting the “great modern synthesis” between Darwinian
evolution and Mendelian genetics, of which Darwin had been ignorant.
It was their work that gave an unexpected value to the raw data
vaulted in a selective-human-breeding warehouse, and this was why
Claude Shannon was pulled out of the differential analyzer room and
enlisted to continue their work in population genetics. Demand for
naturalists and butterfly nets had cratered; biology, like computer
building, demanded mathematicians.

Long before she helped to remake the study of genetics, Barbara
Stoddard Burks, Shannon’s supervisor at Cold Spring Harbor, had
narrated a children’s picture book: “Thousands of stars glittered in the
heavens, and Father showed me the Southern Cross, which is made of
four very bright stars in the shape of a kite. Grown people call the
shape a cross, though, and some feel very proud when they have seen
it because they have to travel so far before they can.”
Few scientists had traveled as far as Burks. As a child, she’d
traveled with her parents, two educators, to the Philippines’ remote
mountains, and when she returned to America, she starred in a
picture book, Barbara’s Philippine Journey, written by her mother in

young Barbara’s voice. She had traveled to the upper ranks of
American science, even at a time when women were still shunted out
of the allegedly purer disciplines, and from theory to fieldwork. Like
Shannon, fourteen years her junior, she did her best work in her
twenties; unlike him, she was a woman who had learned to cope with
colleagues who stigmatized her as exceedingly aggressive for
defending her conclusions with the same confidence they owned.
Burks had traveled with her field, bringing statistical rigor to the
study of genetics. Much of her work was directed at the age-old
nature-nurture problem, particularly with respect to intelligence.
Burks’s most controversial studies were efforts to isolate the impact
of genetics and environment on IQ. Nature without nurture, for
instance, was a study of identical twins raised apart; nurture without
nature was a comparison of the intelligence of foster children and
their foster parents. At twenty-four, her study of foster children led
her to the contentious conclusion that variance in IQ was 75 to 80
percent inherited. Though Burks had no truck with eugenics, the
million index cards at Cold Spring Harbor brought her there for the
same reason they attracted Bush’s attention, and in the eugenics
office’s last years, she published a reliable method of filtering out the
garbage in the files to get at the usable data.
Burks was, in other words, both an expert on and a model of
intelligence; so her words carried some weight when, after reading
some of his preliminary work on genetics, she wrote back to MIT that
“surely Shannon is gifted—perhaps to a very high degree.” And she

shared a moment of commiseration with Bush over this young man
who seemed to have so little to learn from either of them: “To advise a
youth like Shannon is difficult, is it not?” All the same, Shannon still
had to learn the entire field of genetics from scratch. Alleles,
chromosomes, heterozygosity—when he first sat down to it, he
confessed to Bush, he didn’t even understand the words. From this
impoverished start, he (mostly) mastered a new science and produced
publishable work in less than a year.

“An Algebra for Theoretical Genetics” did, in fact, bear all the
marks of a gifted novice airdropped into strange territory—for better
and worse. Shannon only bothered to cite seven other studies in his
bibliography, excusing himself on the grounds that his method of
genetic math was literally unprecedented: “No work has been done
previously along the specific algebraic lines indicated in this thesis.”
But this faith in his own originality cost him: at one point, he
presented as a new discovery a theorem that had been common
knowledge among biologists for two decades. One class in genetics, or
a few more weeks in the library, might have saved him the trouble of
rediscovering it from scratch. As he confided to Bush after the fact,
“Although I looked through the textbooks on Genetics fairly carefully,
I didn’t have the courage to tackle the periodical literature.” At the
same time, though, Shannon offered genuinely new eyes on old
problems, and where his thought was original, it was almost
unconsciously so. Like something of a genetic Joseph Conrad, he

could reach heights of creativity in an adopted language because he
had missed learning its clichés in his youth.
Shannon’s genetic algebra was, in effect, an attempt to re-create for
cells what he had accomplished for circuits. Circuits before Shannon
might be drawn on a blackboard, but not represented as equations. Of
course, it’s much more unwieldy to manipulate a diagram than an
equation, and one couldn’t even begin to use mathematical rules on a
drawing. Everything in Shannon’s thesis flowed from his realization
that circuits were poorly symbolized. What if genes were poorly
symbolized, too? Just as Boolean algebra helped automate the mental
effort of wiring machines, an algebra for genetics might help
biologists predict the course of evolution. The trick, as before, was
abstracting away from what was in front of his eyes. Forget the
hundred switches in the box; forget that 4598 means chess playing.
“Much of the power and elegance of any mathematical theory,”
Shannon wrote, “depends on use of a suitably compact and suggestive
notation, which nevertheless completely describes the concepts
involved.” It was a point, in fact, that was already well hammered into
the heads of mathematicians, who learned early on, for instance, how
Newton and Leibniz had invented the calculus almost simultaneously,
but how Leibniz’s system of symbols had won out as the more
intuitive. But what would be an intuitive system of symbolizing an
entire population down to the genes?
As Shannon had learned in the months before sitting down to
write, “genes are carried in rodlike bodies called chromosomes, a large

number of genes lying side by side along the length of a chromosome.”
(The chromosomes are themselves made of DNA molecules that
encode genes in a four-“letter” alphabet, though no one knew that
yet.) In most species more complex than a single cell, individuals have
a number of pairs of chromosomes (we humans have twenty-three
pairs). In species that reproduce sexually, one comes from the mother
and one from the father. To simplify, Shannon suggested that we
consider an organism with just two chromosome pairs and sixteen
genes. He symbolized its genetic code like this:
A1 B1 C3 D5

E4 F1 G6 H1

A3 B1 C4 D3

E4 F2 G2 H2

The top left entry, A1 B1 C3 D5, is the chromosome from one parent,
and the bottom left entry, A3 B1 C4 D3, is the chromosome from the
other; together they make up one chromosome pair. The column of A1
and A3 (which is bolded) makes up a gene position. Taken individually,
A1 is an allele, or a gene from one parent for a certain trait. A limited
number of alleles is possible at any gene position, and the interaction
of alleles from mother and father determines the qualities their
offspring inherit. Shannon symbolized the possible alleles with the
numbers in subscript. A1 and A3 are different expressions of the same
trait (hair color, for instance—one for brown and one for blond), and
the quality that prevails depends on which gene dominates the other.
Now simplify even further: Imagine that we want to study an entire
population of individuals with respect to just two of its traits, A and B.

Again, each row of symbols comes from one parent, and each column
represents a gene position. Say that there are two possible alleles for
A (brown hair and blond hair, for instance), and three for B (tall,
medium, and short, for instance). In that case, there are twenty-one
genetically distinct individuals (trust us on this), ranging from
A1B1
A1B1
to
A1B3
A2B2.
So how could we simulate that population’s genetic change over
time, or predict the results if it bred at random with another group?
What would the new population look like in five generations? In a
thousand generations?
If we had an infinity of paper and patience, we might do the math
separately for each of the twenty-one individuals, combined randomly
with individuals from the crossbreeding group. That would give us one
generation, and we could repeat the process over and over until we
gave up. But what if the entire population and all of its relevant genes
could be represented by just one algebraic expression? The expression
would have to be, as Shannon said, both compact and suggestive:
compact enough to use as a single variable in an equation, and
suggestive enough to be “unpacked” to all of its constituent

individuals whenever we wanted to halt the cycles of recombination
and investigate the results.
Reasoning like that, Shannon invented a symbol to sum up an
entire population:

.

That expression is really, as he observed, “a whole group of
numbers.” λ is the population as a whole. h, j, i, and k are genes. As we
come to know the range of genes possible for the population, we can
replace those letters with a range of numbers. The column

is one

gene position, and because the first trait under consideration has two
alleles, the value of h or j can range from 1 to 2. The column

is the

other gene position, and because the second trait under consideration
has three alleles, the value of i or k can range from 1 to 3.

now

stands not for a single individual, but for a fraction of the entire
population bearing the genetic code
A1 B3
A2B2.
is an especially elegant way of symbolizing gene frequencies,
because, like any good optical illusion, it reveals two different sets of
information depending on the way we read it. Read vertically, the
columns of variables— and —represent gene positions, which lead
us to the qualities of any individual in the population. Read
horizontally, the rows of variables—hi and jk—represent sets of
chromosomes, each the inheritance of one parent.

This was, in other words, Shannon’s attempt to re-create the
central conceptual leap of this thesis on circuits. As before, a wise
choice of symbols—addition for a parallel circuit, or a grid of variables
for chromosomes—would allow Shannon to simplify and simulate the
future on paper. The rest of his dissertation was a set of genetic
theorems that put his algebraic tools to work. He could estimate the
probability that a gene would appear in an individual after n
generations of mating. He could use addition to stand for the
combination of several populations, and multiplication to stand for
random breeding, and he showed how to calculate the product of two
populations,

•

. There were fractions of populations, imaginary

“negative populations,” and rates of change in gene frequencies over
time. He could consider “lethal factors,” or natural selection against
maladaptive traits over time: evolutionary algebra. There were
algebraic equations in which x was an entire group of organisms: given
the genes of a known group in the present, he could work backward
and identify the genes of the unknown ancestors who planted its
family tree. Most important, he derived the equation—a twelve-line
monster of interlocking brackets and exponents—that gave the
frequencies of three different alleles in any population after any
number of generations. While a number of the dissertation’s
conclusions were old news, this last result, an extrapolation of the
future of any three traits, was entirely new. Less than a year after
learning the vocabulary, he had produced findings some five to ten
years in advance of the field.

Unlike his discoveries in switching, though, Shannon’s genetic work
was pitched at far too high a level of abstraction to prove useful.
There is some irony in the fact that a facility built for such a practical
purpose—to promote the selective breeding of humans—ended with
such impractical work. In the case of all but the simplest of
organisms, Shannon’s algebra demanded too much information to
make real-world predictions. “My theory has to do with what happens
when you have all the genetic facts,” he later explained. “But people
don’t know all of them, especially for humans. They are pretty well
versed on the fruitfly!” Two years after Shannon’s death, geneticists
finished sequencing the human genome; yet even then, far more input
on genetic variation between individual humans would have been
required to render Shannon’s algebra workable. If anything was to
come of Shannon’s dissertation, it would not be anything so
immediately valuable as a digital computer, but rather new methods
and new symbols for thinking through the problems of population
genetics in the most general terms.
Even that, though, would have to materialize without Shannon’s
help. He abandoned his work in genetics as soon as it was typed up
and bound.

In a sense, the subject of the dissertation was Claude Shannon
himself. The project had been Bush’s initiative, and the hypothesis
was his. Hypothesis: the subject, a twenty-three-year-old genius,
working in a scientific field in which he has no training, in which “he

did not even know what the words meant,” can produce original
findings in less than one year. Conclusion: confirmed, mostly.
Behind the scenes, Bush confidentially canvassed his colleagues for
their opinions, admitting as he did that Shannon’s work was still
marked by amateurism: “It goes on for a while and then just stops, and
there are some obvious crudities.” He was prepared, then, to put the
verdict to Shannon as delicately as possible. “I need your guidance
before I speak to him concerning this particular thing,” he wrote to a
Harvard statistician, “for what I say will either encourage or
discourage him greatly.” That worry speaks to the touchy pride that
Bush saw in his student, “a man who should be handled with great
care”—as well as to the simple fact that Shannon’s academic life to
date, from Gaylord to Cambridge, had been free of failure.
In any case, Bush was spared the work of framing bad news: the
reviews came back bearing phrases like “very suitable” and “very
much impressed.” Burks was even more supportive. The story went
that the seventeenth-century mathematician Pascal, at the age of
twelve, had independently discovered the theorems of Euclid’s
geometry by drawing on his playroom floor—and Shannon’s work,
Burks said, was something like that. “This, I feel strongly, should be
polished a bit and then published,” Bush wrote to Shannon with some
satisfaction.
For all that, Shannon ignored him: his genetics work was filed away
and

forgotten.

There

is

no

sign

that

Shannon

heard

any

condescension in the comparison to a precocious twelve-year-old

scribbling on the floor. At the same time, he seems to have had no
wish to be Pascal, rediscovering common knowledge. Such discoveries
might say something remarkable about their authors, an unschooled
boy or an out-of-place engineer, but they said nothing new about the
world. The newest element of Shannon’s dissertation was his algebraic
method itself—and this would only prove worthwhile if Shannon, a
young man with no clout and no network in the field, could convince
geneticists to set aside their familiar tools and start using his.
Shannon understood that as well as anyone: “I had a good time acting
as a geneticist for a couple years,” he later joked.
Burks and Bush included, along with their praise for his work,
candid assessments of its odds of making an impact. Burks wrote to
MIT that “few scientists are ever able to apply creatively a new and
unconventional method furnished by someone else—at least of their
own generation.” Bush passed the warning on to his student, along
with the praise: “I doubt very much whether your publication will
result in further work by others using your method, for there are very
few individuals in this general field who would be likely to do so.” The
very peculiarity of Shannon’s method, the isolation in which he had
invented it, would most likely consign it to irrelevance. Or, at the
absolute best, it would sentence its inventor to a frustrating career as
an outsider geneticist peddling his notation to skeptics. For a student
who had already made his name as one of the nation’s most talented
young engineers, it must have looked like an unappealing future—and

an unnecessary one. Shannon, observed a later colleague, “did not
need to corrupt his reputation with anything non-spectacular.”
Shannon would be adamant on the point, for any number of
publications-that-might-have-been, for the rest of his life: after the
effort of discovery, the effort of communication was secondary, by
far. He had solved a problem to his own satisfaction—and that, as far
as he was concerned, was enough, especially in the sub-spectacular
cases. Shannon explained later: “After I had found the answers it was
always painful to write them up or to publish them (which is how you
get the acclaim).” A more magniloquent scientist might have added
something about the pure Platonic joy of discovery. Not Shannon,
though: “Too lazy, I guess.”
More than a half century after the dissertation was submitted to
Bush and Burks, the editors of Shannon’s collected papers asked an
expert in modern population genetics to read Shannon’s lost
dissertation with a counterfactual eye: if it had been published, and if
it had been read, would it have mattered? The reviewer compared the
dissertation to the work of two other young, mathematically inclined
geneticists who were also working in obscurity in the late 1930s.
While he ranked Shannon as the least of the three, he admitted his
regret “that the work of all three did not become widely known in
1940. It would have changed the history of the subject substantially, I
think.”
Shannon would have to make his history elsewhere. The simplest
explanation for his failure to publish is just that his attention did

what it did so often: it wandered away. In the midst of what was
supposed to be his immersion in genetics, he stopped to write a letter
to his advisor:
Dear Dr. Bush . . .
I’ve been working on three different ideas simultaneously, and
strangely enough it seems a more productive method than sticking
to one problem. . . .
Off and on I have been working on an analysis of some of the
fundamental properties of general systems for the transmission of
intelligence, including telephony, radio, television, telegraphy,
etc. . . .

7
The Labs

Real life mathematics . . . requires barbarians: people willing to
fight, to conquer, to build, to understand, with no predetermined
idea about which tool should be used.
—Bernard Beauzamy

That would have to wait. Not even the most important master’s thesis
ever written and publishable work in genetics were enough for a PhD.
Like every other MIT student, Claude Shannon had to pass his
mandatory language exams. So he returned to Cambridge, and in
between his teaching duties in the mathematics department and his
first sketches on telegraphs, telephones, radio, and TV—whatever a
mathematician

might

have

to

say

about

four

means

of

communication that had precious few “fundamental properties” in
common—he wrote out his stacks of flash cards. French was easier; he
failed German before passing on the second try.
In the midst of a thoroughly numeric life, his recreations were the
opposite. He developed a passion for jazz, especially for the

improvisations he called “unpredictable, irrational.” In Gaylord, he
played brass horn in the marching band; in Cambridge, jazz clarinet in
his room. Playing backup to his record collection was his main
distraction from the “intelligence” project, which increasingly cost
him late nights and late mornings rolling out of bed. He put up with
two roommates in an apartment at 19 Garden Street, not far from
Harvard Square. We can imagine him forced up from his desk by the
low roar of conversation whenever they threw a party, unpracticed in
small talk, fond of walls and doorways. In fact, he was standing in his
doorway at just such a party when a popcorn kernel hit him in the
face.
Norma Levor, who threw the popcorn to get the attention of the
tall, silent young man in the doorway, was only nineteen, but she was
easily the most worldly person Shannon had ever known. She was
born in a penthouse on New York’s Central Park West, her mother the
heir to a pincushion fortune, her father an importer of fine Swiss
fabrics. Tutelage in Upper West Side left-wing politics from her
cousin, a “red” Hollywood screenwriter and playwright, and her sister
at Columbia Law (where the radical students were Trotskyists, she
said, and the mainstream students were just regular communists),
then a summer in Paris as a reporter before her parents brought her
home in advance of war (“That’s why I was there,” she told them, but
they wouldn’t listen), then on to study government at Radcliffe, and
then on to this terribly boring party, where a gaunt young man was

standing at the edge of his bedroom, listening to his own jazz on his
own record player.
“Why don’t you come out here where everybody is?” she asked. He
answered, “I like it here, got some great music.”
“Bix Beiderbecke, you got him?”
“My favorite.”
And that was that. Norma was drawn, she recalled, to Claude’s
“Christ-like” looks. Christ by way of El Greco, maybe, stretched out
across a long frame—but Norma had good taste in most things. And
Claude had twenty-four-hour access to the differential analyzer room.
It was the scene of much of their courtship, compressed as it was—too
short, probably, for Norma to weigh the costs of leaving school, or to
discover anything in Shannon’s personality other than the odd genius
that was his universal first impression, and so short that Claude’s
entire experience of romance before marriage was the first unstable
flush of early-twenties love. Liberal and uninhibited as Norma was,
she was the obverse of everything he had left behind in leaving
Gaylord. “We spoke to each other in our own private intellectual-silly
language,” she wrote. “He loved words and repeated ‘Boolean’ over and
over for the sound of it.” He wrote her poems, some naughty, all
lowercased in the style of e. e. cummings. She said she was a thirdgeneration atheist. He replied, “How can you be anything else?”
They were inseparable to begin with, to the point that Norma ran
into “big trouble” sneaking back in the mornings to her Radcliffe
dorm. In the beginning, Claude “was so loving and so darling and so

funny and so sweet, so full of fun and such a joy to be with, so great
all the time, night and day for months and months and months.” The
popcorn hit him in the face in October 1939; January 10, 1940, was
their wedding day, in a Boston courthouse with a justice of the peace.
The honeymoon in New Hampshire was only marred by an antiSemite hotel keeper who denied them a room (Norma was Jewish;
Claude apparently looked it).
Shannon seemed pleasantly befuddled with the speed with which it
had all happened. He wrote to Bush, “I did not, as you may have
anticipated, marry a lady scientist, but rather a writer. She was
helping me with my French (?) and it apparently ripened into
something more than French.”
In the spring, he put on cap and gown to celebrate his simultaneous
master’s and doctoral degrees, and the National Research Fellowship
he had won, with Bush’s help, to spend the following academic year at
the famous Institute for Advanced Study (IAS) in Princeton. Asked
how the prestigious fellowship came about, he was more than usually
sarcastic: “Well, I applied for it and that’s how it came, you applied for
these things. Tell them how great you are, how smart you are.” Norma
left her senior year at Radcliffe to follow him—not an unusual
decision for a wife in those days, but one that would prove
progressively more galling. In her own fields of left-wing politics and
writing, Norma’s intellectual ambitions were a match for her
husband’s, but they were put on hold.

Before Princeton, though, the pair would have a brief summer’s
stop in Norma’s childhood home: Manhattan. The summer of 1940
was Claude’s second invitation to the Bell Laboratories. Now, though,
he returned not as a first-year graduate student but as an awardwinning PhD with Vannevar Bush as a patron. He was headed to what
was perhaps the world’s foremost technology company—and the
home of the best communications minds in America.

Had he wanted, Shannon could have continued the glide path
through academia, collecting fellowships, amassing awards, and
working his way to tenure and a lifetime of professorial comfort. But
Shannon had proven himself the kind of mathematician who could
stand on his own two feet outside the academy, whose work might
result in more than a university chair. Shannon’s foremost mentor,
Bush, understood this, too, and he set out to shape the course of
Shannon’s life accordingly.
It helped, of course, that Vannevar Bush was, at the time, the high
priest of applied mathematics. He may not have groomed Shannon
explicitly in his own image, but he understood that Shannon’s talents,
properly harnessed, would serve him well outside of a university
setting, the same way Bush’s talents had taken him to a position of
national prominence. It was Bush who had hired Shannon to work on
the differential analyzer; Bush who pushed Shannon to apply his
studies in mathematical logic to theoretical genetics; and Bush who, in
1938, put Shannon to work on the microfiche rapid selector, a “light-

sensing reader system to allow speedy retrieval of microfilmed
information”—a far cry from any of Shannon’s graduate work, but yet
another chance to force his student to flex his mathematical muscles
in an unfamiliar domain. Bush, too, had a tinkerer’s instinct, and he
set to work on Shannon as a tinkerer might: a fresh problem here, a
new research topic there, and eventually Shannon would be
transformed into an applied mathematician of the first rank.
After his acceptance to the Institute for Advanced Study, but
before leaving for Bell, Shannon wrote to Bush seeking career advice.
Bush was emphatic: “The only point I have in mind is I feel that you
are primarily an applied mathematician, and that hence your
[research] problem ought to lie in this exceedingly broad field rather
than in some field of pure mathematics.”

But Bush wasn’t the only one who understood that Shannon’s true
potential lay somewhere other than pure math. Thornton C. Fry, head
of the Bell Labs mathematics group, had taken notice as well. Fry was
“a very careful and formal person.” That was the charitable way of
saying he was a stiff: while working at the National Center for
Atmospheric Research, he “rather frowned on the informal western
clothing of the NCAR staff,” though “this never influenced his respect
for their work.” Fry’s manner reflected his roots as the son of an Ohio
carpenter. By 1920, he had managed to escape the family trade and
had finished a tripartite PhD in mathematics, physics, and astronomy.

It was a combination of luck and skill that helped Fry turn that
training into a job at Western Electric, AT&T’s equipment
manufacturer

and

one

of

the

country’s

leading

engineering

organizations. Interviewed by Western Electric’s research chief, Fry
was caught unusually flat-footed by the questions. He wanted to
know: how familiar was Fry with the work of the era’s most influential
communications engineers? As Fry later recalled his fiasco of an
interview: “Had I ever read the works of Heaviside? I’d never heard of
Heaviside. . . . He asked me if I had ever heard of Campbell. I’d never
heard of Campbell. I think he asked me if I’d ever heard of Molina. I
hadn’t. Whatever he asked me, I hadn’t.” Still, something about this
too-formal young man was impressive; Western Electric rolled the
dice and gave Fry the job. He excelled at it, and after the Western and
AT&T research divisions were spun off to form Bell Labs, Fry found
himself running the Labs’ mathematics research group.

Bell Labs “was where the future, which is what we now happen to
call the present, was conceived and designed,” wrote Jon Gertner in
The Idea Factory, his history of the Labs. Other appraisals struck a
similar note: “the crown jewel”; “the country’s intellectual utopia.” By
the time Shannon joined Bell Labs, the curious mix of techniques,
talent, culture, and scale had turned the modest R&D wing of the
phone company into a powerhouse of discovery. It was an institution
that churned out inventions and ideas at an unheard-of rate and of
unimaginable variety. In Gertner’s words, “to consider what occurred

at Bell Labs . . . is to consider the possibilities of what large human
organizations might accomplish.”
Its founder was a tinkerer of an earlier era: Alexander Graham Bell.
United States Patent No. 174,465—for “the method of, and apparatus
for, transmitting vocal or other sounds telegraphically . . . by causing
electrical undulations, similar in form to the vibrations of the air
accompanying the said vocal or other sound”—earned Bell the title
“inventor

of

the

telephone,”

worldwide

recognition,

and

a

considerable fortune. He founded a phone company, American
Telephone & Telegraph (AT&T), whose goal was suitably immodest:
turn Bell’s invention into a nationwide network of phones, lines, and
transmitters. The result: within a decade, the telephone went from lab
demonstrations to a fixture in 150,000 American homes. By 1915, the
network was a marvel of human engineering, a continent-spanning
web that allowed for transcontinental communication at a time when
physical travel from coast to coast still took nearly a week.
In 1925, Bell Labs was carved out of the phone company as a standalone entity, with custody shared jointly by AT&T and Western
Electric. Walter Gifford, the president of AT&T, observed that the
Labs, while nominally an arm of the phone company, could “carry on
scientific research on a scale that is probably not equaled by any
organization in the country, or in the world.” The goal of Bell Labs
wasn’t simply clearer and faster phone calls. The Labs were tasked
with dreaming up a future in which every form of communication
would be a machine-aided endeavor.

So-called basic research became the Labs’ lifeblood. If Google’s
“20 percent time”—the practice that frees one-fifth of a Google
employee’s schedule to devote to blue-sky projects—seems like a
West Coast indulgence, then Bell Labs’ research operation, buoyed by
a federally approved monopoly and huge profit margins, would appear
gluttonous by comparison. Its employees were given extraordinary
freedom. Figure out, a Bell researcher might be told, how
“fundamental questions of physics or chemistry might someday affect
communications.” Might someday—Bell researchers were encouraged
to think decades down the road, to imagine how technology could
radically alter the character of everyday life, to wonder how Bell
might “connect all of us, and all of our new machines, together.” One
Bell employee of a later era summarized it like this: “When I first came
there was the philosophy: look, what you’re doing might not be
important for ten years or twenty years, but that’s fine, we’ll be there
then.”
The extraordinary freedom was a scientist’s dream, and the ability
to work as they pleased drew together an astonishing set of minds.
Bernard “Barney” Oliver, a Bell Labs researcher who would later head
up research for Hewlett-Packard, recalled thinking, “Gee, you know,
here I am, I’ve got the world’s knowledge in electrical engineering at
my beck and call. All I’ve got to do is pick up the phone or go see
somebody and I can get the answer.”
That accumulation of talent paid tremendous dividends. In the
span of a few decades, Bell researchers invented the fax machine,

touch-tone dialing, and the solar battery cell. They engineered the
first-ever long-distance phone call and synchronized the sounds and
images in movies. During the war, they improved radar, sonar, and the
bazooka, and they created a secure line to allow Franklin Roosevelt to
speak to Winston Churchill. And in 1947, Bell researchers John
Bardeen, William Shockley, and Walter Brattain created the transistor,
the foundation of modern electronics. The trio would earn a Nobel
Prize, one of the six Nobels given to Bell scientists during the
twentieth century.
It was one thing for an industrial laboratory to hire qualified PhDs
and put them to work on various pressing engineering problems. But
Nobel Prizes? Pie-in-the-sky projects? Ten or twenty years of leeway?
Even accounting for nostalgia, Thornton Fry’s judgment hardly seems
out of place; looking back on the Labs, he called it “a fairyland
company.”
Consider Clinton Davisson, Nobel laureate and Bell Labs researcher.
Known as Davy, he was “wraith-like and slow-moving . . . an almost
spectral presence.” A frail, quiet midwesterner who kept largely to
himself, Davy was able to write his own ticket at the Labs. As Gertner
put it, “he was allowed to carve out a position as a scientist who
rejected any kind of management role and instead work as a lone
researcher, or sometimes a researcher teamed with one or two other
experimentalists, pursuing only projects that aroused his interest.”
Importantly, “he seemed to display little concern about how (or
whether) such research would assist the phone company.”

Bell Labs was neither a university nor a charity. And yet Davy was
allowed to conduct endless experiments on the company dime, many
of which had only the most tenuous tie to the bottom line. It’s telling
that Davy’s Nobel Prize—awarded for proving that electrons moved in
a wave pattern, knowledge gleaned by smashing a piece of crystalline
nickel with electrons—won the Labs fame, but no incremental
fortune. A mind like his—one that could have navigated its way into
the academic career of his choosing—was considered useful to Bell
executives, even if the precise use was fuzzy.
A rigorous investment in basic research meant that there were, at
any given time, several Davys on the Labs’ payroll. Of course, freedom
to research at will could be a burden, a kind of anxiety, in its own
right. The thinkers who thrived at the Labs were those who,
confronted with a nearly limitless field of questions, chose the “right”
ones: the ones most fertile of breakthroughs in technique or theory,
the ones that opened on broad vistas rather than dead ends. This
choice of questions has always been a matter of intuition as much as
erudition, the irreducible kernel of art in science.
Claude Shannon was one of those who thrived. Among the
institutions that had dotted the landscape of Shannon’s life, it’s hard
to imagine a place better suited to his mix of passions and particular
working style than the Bell Laboratories of the 1940s. “I had freedom
to do anything I wanted from almost the day I started,” he reflected.
“They never told me what to work on.”

Thornton Fry hadn’t simply recruited Shannon to the Labs; he
also assigned him to the math group, which Fry had crafted himself to
ensure that the talent he recruited wasn’t wasted. Fry held strong
views about the role of mathematicians within industry, and
depending on one’s perspective, he was either a visionary or a heretic.
In a long, thoughtful meditation published in the Bell System
Technical Journal, Fry began by pointing out the obvious: there was,
for all the enlightened teaching in university math departments, a
near-total lack of industrial training for mathematicians who aspired
to build things rather than simply think about things. “Though the
United States holds a position of outstanding leadership in pure
mathematics,” Fry wrote, “there is no school which provides an
adequate mathematical training for the student who wishes to use the
subject in the field of industrial applications rather than to cultivate it
as an end in itself.”
It’s taken as a given in our era that a high-level math mind—a
“quant”—can find gainful employment. But that wasn’t always the
case, and especially not in the world of elite mathematics in the early
twentieth century. What was valued in the highest levels of
mathematics had precious little application outside of it. Solutions to
abstract problems won glory, and thus whole careers were devoted to
chasing solutions to problems like the Riemann hypothesis, the
Poincaré and Collatz conjectures, and Fermat’s last theorem. These
were the math world’s greatest puzzles, and the fact that decades had
passed with no solution made them all the more tantalizing. They

were taken dead seriously, and whether or not the solutions had any
practical aim or application was an afterthought, if it was a thought at
all.
Fry, himself a mathematics PhD, understood this better than most.
“The typical mathematician,” Fry observed,
is not the sort of man to carry on an industrial project. He is a
dreamer, not much interested in things or the dollars they can
be sold for. He is a perfectionist, unwilling to compromise;
idealizes to the point of impracticality; is so concerned with the
broad horizon that he cannot keep his eye on the ball.
All of which left many a graduate student exceptionally well
trained in a style of problem solving that had limited use outside of
the mathematical fraternity. An industrial lab, then, had about as
much use for a mathematician as a fish had for a bicycle—unless. . . .
Fry’s hunch was that not all mathematicians wanted to write
papers and chase tenure. He also guessed that the right environment
could play to their strengths and put them to work on practical
things, set them on “everyday problems” and “concrete exploitation.”
And he was among the few people in a position to make that happen
—and to make his case for the “industrial mathematician” as a new
breed of thinker-doer.
He baked his philosophy into the heart of the math group. His case
was simple: the engineers of Bell Labs were “pathetically ignorant of
mathematics,” but math, applied correctly, could help them work out

complex problems in telephony. At the same time, the math group
served as a catch-all for any gifted member of the Labs staff too odd
to play well with others. “Mathematicians are queer people. You are
and I am. That’s a fact,” Fry told a mathematically inclined
interviewer. “So that anybody who was queer enough that you didn’t
know what to do with him, you said, ‘This fellow is a mathematician.
Let’s have him transferred over to Fry.’ ”
The math group under Fry’s leadership began as an in-house
consulting organization, with mathematicians available as needed to
the engineers, physicists, chemists, and others, but free to pick their
own internal “clients.” They were there to offer advice and assistance;
the management and messy realities of industrial projects could be
left to others. As Bell Labs’ Henry Pollak observed, “our principle was
that we’ll do anything once, but nothing twice.”
This gave the group a broad mandate, flexible even within the
famously loose culture of Bell Labs. As one researcher from that era
put it, “Our job was to stick our nose into everybody’s business.” In
Fry’s words, “there was nothing that we weren’t entitled to work on if
we wanted to.” Or as Shannon himself recalled, “I was in the
mathematics research group which was kind of free-wheeling and not
so oriented on projects as people trying to do individual research as
fast as they could. . . . I enjoyed it more that way, where I was working
on my own projects.”
In exchange for its independence, the math group acquainted itself
with the phone company’s ways. The earliest members climbed

telephone poles and operated switchboards. They mastered the
mathematics of switching and solved thorny network problems. Like
the rest of the Labs’ employees, they addressed one another
exclusively by last names. In time, their hands-on experience
combined with their training would enable them to delve deep into
the underlying mathematics of communication engineering. The math
group would eventually be regarded as a standout within the industry,
and Fry’s vision would set the standard for the use of mathematical
minds within a large private-sector concern.

Shannon was given a summer’s exposure to Bell Labs—and
though few records of his summer there exist, we do know something
of his output. Shannon’s work during this period is captured in two
technical memoranda, both of which give a sense of how
mathematical skills could meet the telephone company’s goals.
Shannon’s first effort was the “Theorem on Color Coding.” In a
system as complex as the Bell telephone network, questions about the
coloration of wires were a serious business. Shannon was tasked with
finding an answer to the following puzzle:
There are a number of relays, switches, and other devices A,
B, . . . , K to be interconnected. The connecting wires are first
formed in a cable with the leads associated with A coming out at
one point those with B at another, etc., and it is necessary, in
order to distinguish the different wires, that all those coming

out of the cable at the same point be differently colored. There
may be any number of leads joining the same two points. We
might have, for example, four wires from A to B, two from B to
C, three from C to D and one from A to D. The four from A to B
must all be of different colors, and all different from those from
B to C and A to D, but the three from C to D can be the same as
three of those A to B. Also the one from A to D can be the same
as one from B to C. If we assume that not more than m leads
start at any one point, the question arises as to the least number
of different colors that is sufficient to color any network.
If this question has the flavor of “two trains leave the station at the
same time . . . ,” it’s because problems like this lend themselves to the
search for mathematical shortcuts. That’s what Shannon was after
here: a workaround, something that would allow Bell engineers
without advanced degrees in mathematics a quick and easy way to
arrive at the minimum number of colors they needed for a network.
And Shannon’s answer—multiply the number of network lines by 1.5;
the greatest integer less than or equal to that value is the number of
colors you need—was thorough and thoughtful and well proved. If it
wasn’t the stuff of mathematical legend, it was still eminently useful.
And unlike, say, an algebra of genetics or a meditation on symbolic
logic and circuits, it could be put into immediate practice.
This was significant. The paper illustrates the ways in which the
formal education of Claude Shannon the adult had mixed with the
informal instruction of Claude Shannon the boy, the one whose

childhood was spent happily playing with broken radios and
makeshift elevators. And it shows that the part of his nature that was
hardheaded and practical had remained firmly intact. It isn’t a stretch
to imagine that solving this particular problem—technical and narrow
though it may have seemed—gave Shannon a great deal of joy. It was,
after all, an intricate puzzle. And it was reminiscent, as well, of a
youth spent playing telegraph engineer, a kind of graduated version of
building a barbed-wire network.
Shannon’s second effort, “The Use of the Lakatos-Hickman Relay
in a Subscriber-Sender Case,” was an attempt to simplify and
economize the relays Bell used to connect phone calls. It was the kind
of work that called into question whether the Bell network’s system
of relays, as currently constituted, was optimal, and whether there
wasn’t a better way to make it operate. In other words, it was a kind of
tinkering on the very largest scale, on the beating heart of the phone
system. It led Shannon to think up two new options for circuits that
drew on his master’s thesis work—“designed by a combination of
common sense and Boolean algebra methods”—and though he was
quick to acknowledge that each of his designs had its own flaws, he
also defended them as superior to what was on offer.
When he first arrived at the Labs, Shannon had his doubts: Would
an industrial laboratory constrain his ability to think big thoughts and
dream up new ideas? After this summer’s work, those concerns were
put to bed. The Labs had given him as broad a scope as he might have
hoped for in a professional setting.

“I got quite a kick,” Shannon wrote to Vannevar Bush, “when I
found out that the Labs are actually using [my] relay algebra in design
work and attribute a couple new circuit designs to it.” As with a
tinkerer who successfully flips the switch on his latest creation, it
isn’t difficult to imagine Bush reading that sentence, sitting back, and
smiling with satisfaction.

8
Princeton
By the end of his Bell Labs summer and his arrival at the Institute for
Advanced Study in Princeton that fall, the name “Claude Shannon”
was pinging its way through math and engineering circles. Vannevar
Bush had, of course, helped it along. But others were noticing the
young mathematician as well. Norbert Wiener, by then no longer a
genius in training under his father but a highly respected
mathematician in his own right, wrote in 1940 that he thought
Shannon “a man of extraordinary brilliancy and intelligence. . . . He
has already done work of great originality and is with no doubt a
coming man.”
On September 27, 1940, Oswald Veblen of the Institute for
Advanced Study touted Shannon in a note to Thornton Fry. Veblen
saw in Shannon a rare talent and shared a Shannon paper with Orrin
Frink, a leader in the mathematical field of topology. At MIT, too,
Shannon had been identified as a standout. On October 21, H. B.
Phillips, the head of MIT’s math department, cabled a fellow faculty

member: “Mr. Shannon is one of the ablest graduates we have ever
had and can do first class research in any field in which he becomes
interested.” The recipient of that message was Marston Morse, who
had a field of mathematics named after him, and who joined Wiener
and Von Neumann as three out of just seven winners of the Bôcher
Memorial Prize, one of math’s highest honors.
Morse. Phillips. Frink. Fry. Veblen. Bush. By this point, Shannon
had acquired an imposing roster of supporters and patrons; these
were math’s kingmakers, and even without the usual conspicuous
striving of the ambitious and talented, he had earned their backing.
He had left a mark on men who were discerning judges of raw
intellectual horsepower, and they found in him one of their own.

Shuttled up and down the coast, from one elite institution to
another, from one set of mentors to another, from fellowship to
fellowship: there is sometimes a kind of placelessness that settles into
these scientific stories, and Shannon’s in particular. In this, the
travels of the ambitious young scientist resemble nothing so much as
the spiraling journey of the ambitious civil servant of an earlier age, as
described memorably by Benedict Anderson:
He sees before him a summit rather than a centre. He travels up
its corniches in a series of looping arcs which, he hopes, will
become smaller and tighter as he nears the top. . . . On this
journey there is no assured resting-place; every pause is

provisional. The last thing the functionary wants is to return
home; for he has no home with any intrinsic value. And this: on
his upward-spiraling road he encounters as eager fellow-pilgrims
his functionary colleagues, from places and families he has
scarcely heard of and surely hopes never to have to see.
Who were Shannon’s new traveling companions in Princeton?
Where did they come from?
There was John von Neumann, a Jewish-Hungarian prodigy, who by
the age of six could crack jokes in ancient Greek or give you the
quotient of 93,726,784 divided by 64,733,647 (or any other eight-digit
numbers) without pencil and paper. He was the kind of student who
once literally brought a tutor to tears of awe, who spent a college
lecture on “unsolved problems in mathematics” doodling the solutions
in his notebook. We owe to Von Neumann much of game theory (the
formal study of strategic decisions, as in the famous Prisoner’s
Dilemma), and much of the intellectual architecture of modern
computers, and a decent chunk of quantum mechanics. Shannon
called him “the smartest person I’ve ever met”; it was a common
opinion. What began as a relationship of starstruck admiration—“I
was a graduate student—he was one of the great mathematicians of
the world,” said Shannon—would evolve in later years into something
more like an equal partnership between two pioneers in the field of
artificial intelligence.
There was Hermann Weyl, a refugee from the Nazis, both a
mathematician and philosopher of physics. As a mathematician, Weyl

worked to reconcile the revolution in quantum mechanics with the
doctrines of classical physics. As a philosopher, he considered
Einstein’s work on the relativity of space and time not only a turning
point in science, but a new insight into the relationship between
human consciousness and the external world. Just two years after
Einstein published his theory of general relativity, Weyl wrote the
definitive treatment of relativity’s philosophical foundations. “It is as
if a wall which separated us from Truth has collapsed,” he exulted. “It
has brought us much nearer to grasping the plan that underlies all
physical happening.” This was highly rarefied stuff by Shannon’s
standards, and it may have been with some trepidation that Shannon
sat down in Weyl’s office to pitch to his new advisor a research
program for the next year.
Weyl was generally dismissive of Shannon’s genetics work (as was
Shannon himself, by this point), but Shannon could converse fluently
on modern physics, and he won Weyl over by developing an analogy
between the quantum weirdness with which physicists were grappling
and the problems in communications mathematics that he was just
beginning to puzzle through. What if the mathematical model for a
message sent over telephone or telegraph wires had something in
common with the models for the motion of elementary particles?
What if the content of any message and the path of any particle could
be described not as mechanical motions, or as randomized nonsense,
but as random-looking processes that obeyed laws of probability—
what physicists called “stochastic” processes? Think of “the

fluctuations in the price of stocks, the ‘random walk’ of a drunk in a
sidewalk”—think, for that matter, of a clarinet solo—happenings that
were less than fixed but more than chance: maybe “intelligence” and
electrons were alike in that way, taking haphazard walks within
probability’s bounds. That got Weyl’s attention.
It was one of the early hints that a mathematics of messaging might
have something more to say than the most efficient design of a
telephone network: that it might offer something more fundamental
about “the plan” that the greatest physicists believed they had
glimpsed. It was still only a guess, maybe a useful analogy and nothing
more; but with Weyl’s approval, Shannon brought his full-time
attention to bear on the questions of “intelligence” that he had first
raised in his letter to Bush.

And, of course, there was Einstein. He had seen his books burned
by the Nazis and had read his own name on a list of assassination
targets; like Weyl, he had escaped Germany early, and had made his
home in Princeton since 1933. There are a few Einstein-and-Shannon
stories, and though they surely cannot all be true at the same time, we
offer them all in the interest of completeness.
Norma recalled: “I poured tea for [Einstein], and he told me I was
married to a brilliant, brilliant man.” She elaborated in another
interview, when she said that Einstein eyed her over his teacup and
remarked, “Your husband has the greatest mind I have ever come
across.” The anecdote has been repeated often, but it almost certainly

never happened. For one thing, by 1940, Shannon had done some
interesting, important work, but nothing that would have attracted
Einstein’s attention. Physics, after all, wasn’t Shannon’s field. Further,
unlike others at the IAS, we have no record of Shannon trying to
elbow his way into audiences with the world’s best-known and mostsought-after scientists. Nothing in Shannon’s behavior would have
indicated his interest in subjecting Einstein to a newly minted PhD’s
thoughts on this or that, and so the scene simply doesn’t square with
what we know of Shannon. (The more conspicuous John Nash, by
contrast, insisted on meeting with Einstein even as a young student
and spent an hour walking him through his thoughts on “gravity,
friction, and radiation,” according to biographer Sylvia Nasar. At the
end of the session, Einstein said, “You had better study some more
physics, young man.”)
On the other hand, a story from Claude’s friend and fellow juggling
professor, Arthur Lewbel, is more plausible—and suggests that
Einstein had more practical interests than the quality of Shannon’s
mind:
The story is that Claude was in the middle of giving a lecture to
mathematicians in Princeton, when the door in the back of the
room opens, and in walks Albert Einstein. Einstein stands
listening for a few minutes, whispers something in the ear of
someone in the back of the room, and leaves. At the end of the
lecture, Claude hurries to the back of the room to find the
person that Einstein had whispered to, to find out what the

great man had to say about his work. The answer: Einstein had
asked directions to the men’s room.
Lewbel recalls Shannon sharing this story twice—the only
difference being that, in the other version, Einstein was after
directions to tea and cookies, an ending that Lewbel confessed was
more likely.
Beyond that, Shannon only recalled that he would often pass
Einstein on the way to work in the morning, “and he usually would
walk along in sort of bedroom slippers and had old clothes hanging on
and he looked like a transient almost, I’d say, and I’d go along in my
car and I’d wave at him and he’d wave back. He didn’t know really who
I was but he’d wave back. Probably he thought I was some kind of
weirdo.”
Beyond everything else, Norma’s story of life-altering Einsteinian
praise seems hard to reconcile with Claude’s version of benign
neglect. Whatever their conflicting accounts tell us about Einstein,
they shed some light on the two very different people Norma and
Claude were discovering in one another, to their growing dismay:
theatrical and taciturn, expansive and self-contained. Less than a year
into their marriage, it seemed that they had little in common beyond a
fondness for jazz.

In truth, the Institute for Advanced Study proved unhealthy for
Shannon. For some, it was a land of academic lotus-eating, an island

where the absence of the ordinary worries of the job—students,
deadlines, publication pressure—proved enervating rather than
invigorating. The physicist Richard Feynman, who was working on his
doctorate at Princeton while Shannon was at the IAS down the street,
observed the inertia firsthand: “A kind of guilt or depression worms
inside of you, and you begin to worry about not getting any ideas. . . .
You’re not in contact with the experimental guys. You don’t have to
think how to answer questions from the students. Nothing!”
There were only a few months of this for Shannon, rather than a
lifetime. He never stagnated in the way that Feynman found all too
common among the lifers. But the quiet of the place, and his freedom
from obligation, played into his lifelong tendency to isolate himself.
Most days were spent shut indoors, alternating between the notepad
and the clarinet, and back again. He would hardly even move to turn
from math to music—only reposition himself in the chair beside his
desk, put on a jazz record, and take up his clarinet to accompany it.
Teddy Grace, an earthy southern alto, was his favorite singer:
Turn off the moon, that heavenly spotlight above
Turn off the stars, for I’m falling madly in love. . . .
Norma was isolated, too. A plan to finish college at nearby Rutgers
fell through. Cut off from her family and friends in a sleepy college
town (especially sleepy after New York and Paris and Boston), she had
no desire to be a housewife at twenty—and yet here she was. Norma
worked to fill the days. She invited the institute professors over for

tea as often as she could, and, on the strength of her fluency in
French, found a job with the Economic Section of the League of
Nations, which like so many of the academics at her teas had been
driven out of Europe by war.
But it wasn’t enough. No amount of prodding could make Claude
share her passion for politics: “You know where my interests are, and
that’s enough.” Norma grew convinced that Claude was depressed—
but, whatever the cause, the marriage ended as quickly as it began.
After the final fight, Norma left Princeton on the train back to
Manhattan. Once the divorce was official, she went west, and on the
start of her real life: to California, the screenwriting career she’d
wanted since she was a child, Communist Party meetings, marriage to
a Hollywood fellow traveler, the blacklist, and self-exile to Europe.

Why we love the people we do is one of the enduring human
mysteries—surpassed only, perhaps, by the mysterious nature of the
stories we tell ourselves about those loves. What, if anything, Claude
might have told himself about the end of his relationship with Norma
is lost to us. We have the facts: that they married quickly, discovered
cracks in their bond in late 1940, and divorced thereafter.
But we know something else, too: we know of the other great
struggle in Shannon’s personal life during this fraught time. On
September 16, 1940, only days after Shannon arrived at Princeton,
Franklin D. Roosevelt signed the Selective Service and Training Act,
requiring all male citizens from twenty-one to thirty-five to register

for the military draft. On October 16, 1940, the mass registration
began. The United States had not yet formally joined the war, but the
president and his advisors had seen enough of the totalitarian threat
to understand its seriousness. On signing the act, Franklin Roosevelt
issued a warning: “America stands at the crossroads of its destiny.
Time and distance have been shortened. A few weeks have seen great
nations fall. We cannot remain indifferent to the philosophy of force
now rampant in the world. We must and will marshal our great
potential strength to fend off war from our shores.”
What those high-flown words meant for the twenty-four-year-old
Shannon and men of his generation was the very real possibility that
they would be sent overseas to fight a war—a prospect that, up to this
point, had still seemed remote. But signing his name to a registration
card surely focused Shannon’s mind on the grim reality of having to
put his research on hold—indeed, put his entire life on hold—and don
a uniform.
For Shannon, this was not a welcome prospect. While we have no
indication that he went out of his way to avoid the draft, we do know
that he was not the least bit eager to deploy overseas. In his own
words,
Things were moving fast there, and I could smell the war coming
along. And it seemed to me I would be safer working full-time
for the war effort, safer against the draft, which I didn’t exactly
fancy. I was a frail man, as I am now. . . . I was trying to play the

game, to the best of my ability. But not only that, I thought I’d
probably contribute a hell of a lot more.
In another interview, he recalled that “if you can make yourself
more useful somewhere else you won’t get into the Army. That
seemed to me a wise move.” A friend noted that Shannon, an
introvert, worried not only about the dangers of an overseas
deployment but also about the close quarters of Army life: “I think he
did the work with that fear in him, that he might have to go into the
Army, which means being with lots of people around which he
couldn’t stand. He was phobic about crowds and people he didn’t
know.”
So Shannon turned to his Bell Labs mentor, Thornton Fry, who
managed to secure him a contract doing mathematical analysis for the
National Defense Research Committee. The leadership of the NDRC
was a who’s who of the nation’s scientists and engineers—and it
included most of the key figures in Shannon’s professional circle,
including the man who had plucked Shannon out of the Midwest:
Vannevar Bush.
Bush was the NDRC’s godfather. He had firsthand experience of the
breakdown in communication between military officers and civilian
scientists during World War I, so when he outlined the need for a
federal committee to bridge the gap, he spoke with force and
conviction. And he carried that conviction into the Oval Office on
June 12, 1940, to make the case for the NDRC to the president
himself. It took all of ten minutes for FDR to say yes. “There were

those who protested that the action of setting up NDRC was an end
run,” Bush later wrote, “a grab by which a small company of scientists
and engineers acting outside established channels, got hold of the
authority and money for the program of developing new weapons.
That, in fact, is exactly what it was.”
For Shannon, the NDRC would represent an end run of a different
kind: it freed him from his worries about the draft board. He would,
like many mathematicians of his generation, put his mind, rather than
his body, to work on the country’s behalf.

9
Fire Control
Wartime would interrupt the working lives of a whole generation—
but in the universe of possible interruptions, a grant to research
national defense issues with some of the nation’s foremost engineers
and mathematicians was a blessing. Shannon seemed to understand
this; it might explain why he tried, in early December, to return the
money given to him for his fellowship at the Institute for Advanced
Study. But his $166.67 check came back. The “requirements of
military training or other defense emergencies” were an exceptional
case, the fellowship office observed; Shannon could keep the money,
assuming he resumed his research at the war’s close.
Thornton Fry had contacted an NDRC colleague, Warren Weaver, to
help find Shannon a project. Born in rural Wisconsin, in 1894, Weaver
trained at the University of Wisconsin, joined the Army’s Air Service
in 1917, and, after a detour at Throop College of Technology (later
renamed the California Institute of Technology, or Caltech), returned

to Wisconsin to teach in and then chair the math department—a
department of which Thornton Fry was a member as well.
Weaver shared Shannon’s small-town roots and love of working
with his hands. When he wasn’t off practicing science or funding it,
he was at home, “chopping wood, moving rocks, gardening, puttering
in his shop.” A shy and introspective boy, Weaver discovered a
passion for engineering inside a small dry-cell motor, a Christmas
present he promptly disassembled:
I didn’t know any name to apply to this sort of activity—I didn’t
know (or care, I suspect) whether anyone could earn his living
doing this kind of thing. But it was perfectly clear to me that
taking things apart and finding out how they are constructed
and how they work was exciting, stimulating, and tremendous
fun. It may well be the case that in the small rural village where I
lived . . . there was not a single person who had any real concept
of what the word “science” meant. I was accordingly told that
this was “engineering”; and from that time until I was a junior in
college, I assumed without question that I wanted to be an
engineer.
It was a reflection that could have just as easily come from the pen
of his grantee, Claude Shannon. But there the similarities stopped.
Where Shannon was an avowed atheist, Weaver was devout—and saw
science as self-evident proof of the divine. “I think that God has
revealed Himself to many at many times and in many places,” Weaver

wrote. “Indeed, He continuously reveals Himself to man today: every
new discovery of science is a further ‘revelation’ of the order which
God has built into His universe.” Where Shannon was allergic to
administrative work and bureaucracies of almost every kind, Weaver
thrived in them. Where Shannon considered teaching a nettlesome
requirement of university employment, Weaver relished it. And where
Shannon could continue to pound away at a mathematical problem or
research question until he struck sparks, pursuing problems with
breathtaking intuition and instinct, Weaver had discovered that he
possessed no such gift. In a remarkably self-aware reflection on his
strengths and weaknesses, Weaver observed: “I had a good capacity
for assimilating information, something of a knack for organizing, an
ability to work with people, a zest for exposition, an enthusiasm that
helped to advance my ideas. But I lacked that strange and wonderful
creative spark that makes a good researcher. Thus I realized that there
was a definite ceiling on my possibilities as a mathematics professor.”
Below that ceiling, however, Weaver was a heterodox thinker whose
passions ran the gamut; he published or worked on problems in
engineering, mathematics, machine learning, translation, biology, the
natural sciences, and probabilities. But unlike many of his colleagues,
he believed in a world outside the confines of science and math, and
he avoided the all-too-common insularity of the fields he worked in
and the thinkers who worked in them. “Do not overestimate science,
do not think that science is all that there is,” he urged students in a
1966 talk. “Do not concentrate so completely on science that there’s

nobody in this room who is going to spend the next seven days
without reading some poetry. I hope that there’s nobody in this room
that’s going to spend the next seven days without listening to some
music, some good music, some modern music, some music.”
He lived by his words: he was, according to Fry, epicure enough to
identify a sip of wine by its varietal, vineyard, and even vintage year.
And he maintained a lifelong passion for Lewis Carroll’s Alice’s
Adventures in Wonderland. By the mid-1960s he had collected 160
versions of the text in forty-two languages, a compilation that moved
him to write Alice in Many Tongues, a study of the effect of the act of
translation on the meaning of the tale.
Weaver was many things Shannon was not: a populist, a
philosophizer, a human interface between science and the wider
world. But at that precise moment, those differences mattered little:
he was someone who saw the potential in Shannon and had the ability
to put that potential to work on wartime projects. He awarded
Shannon $3,000 and a ten-month contract, for a project called
“Mathematical Studies Relating to Fire Control.” Shannon would
complete much of his work in this field while remaining in Princeton,
but he collaborated with two Bell Labs engineers, Ralph Blackman and
Hendrik Bode, who would join the impressive group of influences and
mentors in Shannon’s life.

Fire control was, essentially, the study of hitting moving targets.
The targets were anything and everything the enemy could hurl

through the air to cause damage—planes, rockets, ballistics. Imagine a
gun firing a single shot at a target. Now imagine that the gun is the
size of a two-story house, that it is placed on a moving Navy ship in
the middle of the ocean, and that it is trying to shoot down an enemy
fighter moving at 350 miles per hour. That’s a rough description of the
challenge of fire control, and it was put to the mathematics group at
Bell Labs, among others, to design the machines that could
successfully solve that problem. Accurately determining the vertical
coordinates, the horizontal coordinates, the speed of the ballistics, the
likely position of the target, the time from launch to impact—all of
this had to be processed by machine, without error, under fire, in split
seconds.
The earliest days of the war revealed how badly the Allied defense
systems needed an upgrade. The German Luftwaffe, an air force
disbanded by the Treaty of Versailles, had been impressively
reconstituted under Hitler and Hermann Göring. It had been
responsible for the destruction of Guernica during the Spanish Civil
War, and for the London Blitz, and as the war dragged on, the German
military developed and deployed some of the world’s first cruise and
ballistic missiles.
Still, what special insight did telephone engineers have into threats
like that? A lot, as it turned out. “At first thought it may seem curious
that it was a Bell Telephone Laboratories group which came forward
with new ideas and techniques to apply to the AA [anti-aircraft]
problems,” Warren Weaver admitted. And yet, Weaver continued, the

Bell Labs group was a natural fit, for two reasons. “First, this group not
only had long and expert experience with a wide variety of electrical
techniques. Second, there are surprisingly close and valid analogies
between the fire control prediction problem and certain basic
problems in communications engineering.”
At the most basic level, the speed and quality of information was
vital both to phone systems and fire control systems. A phone call
reaching its intended recipient was a struggle against noise. An antiaircraft missile hitting its target presented the same conceptual
challenge: How to get from point A to point B with a minimum of
interference? In the case of the missile, how to guard against the wind,
or factor in the movement of the target, among a dozen other
variables? Because both problems demanded the quick calculation of
probabilities—the probable structure of a message, or the probable
location of the target at any given moment—both required high-level
statistical inference. Both presented the challenge of building
machines to accurately translate that math into action.
Of course, the Bell engineers tasked with working on the problem
were under no illusions: even if the technological problems shared
some qualities, the stakes couldn’t have been more different. A
fraction of a second of difference in the control of an anti-aircraft gun
meant the difference between life and death. For Shannon, in
particular, the fire control work represented some of the most
concrete work he had done to date. Unlike, say, his research on
genetics, there was nothing abstract about shooting down airplanes.

There were mechanical as well as conceptual similarities between
communications and fire control work. Bell Labs had begun its work
on fire control when one of its engineers discovered that an existing
piece of communications technology—a potentiometer—could be
repurposed as part of an anti-aircraft gun. The potentiometer was
used as a sort of moving hinge that responded to variations of voltage
in, say, a telephone or radio receiver. A young engineer at the Labs,
David

Parkinson,

had

also

experimented

with

connecting

a

potentiometer to a pen on graph paper, which allowed it to plot the
outputs of electromechanical systems. The idea that such a thing
could help shoot down an aircraft had come to him, of all possible
places, in a dream. In the dream,
I found myself in a gun pit with an anti-aircraft gun crew. . . .
There was a gun there which looked to me like—I had never had
any close association with anti-aircraft guns, but possess some
general information on artillery—like a 3 inch. It was firing
occasionally and the impressive thing was that every shot
brought down an airplane! After three or four shots, one of the
men in the crew smiled at me and beckoned me to come closer
to the gun. When I drew near, he pointed to the exposed end of
the left trunnion. Mounted there was the control potentiometer
of my level recorder! There was no mistaking it—it was the
identical item.

Reflecting on the dream the next morning, he realized that “if my
potentiometer could control the pen on the recorder, something
similar could, with suitable engineering, control an anti-aircraft gun.”
Parkinson took the idea to his superiors. They ran it up the chain at
Bell, and it went from there to the Army Signal Corps. The T-10
director, built a few years later, was the culmination of Parkinson’s
dream, a project that drew on the Labs’ years of communications
work. In building it, they borrowed not only the language of radio and
telephony, with which they were most familiar, but the component
parts, too. Later renamed the M-9, the device would see combat: more
than 1,500 M-9s were produced and put into the field. With M-9s
directing the guns, the number of shells required to hit the average
enemy aircraft was cut from thousands to just 100.

Many hands made the anti-aircraft directors a reality; Shannon’s
were two of them. “I think England would’ve been entirely demolished
if they hadn’t had these directors,” he said after the war. While
manned planes could still, with a little luck, evade anti-aircraft fire,
“the buzzbombs and V1 missiles were going in perfectly straight lines
and at moderate enough speed and everything, so that they could be
predicted very well by these anti-aircraft directors, and they knocked
down like 95% of them before they got to England, and I think if they
hadn’t had those England would’ve lost.”
Shannon’s particular contribution focused on the problem of
“smoothing.” The earliest prototypes of the gun directors produced

occasionally erroneous readouts, leading to jerkiness in the motions
of the guns. Smoothing was the process of cleaning up that data,
without adding any delay in the calculation. The result of Shannon’s
work, five technical papers of varying lengths, was twofold: an
upgrade to the original T-10 model, and a later report on the statistics
of smoothing in general. The former never saw the light of day; the
latter became a key work in the field.
What might Shannon have taken away from all of this? David
Mindell, a historian of technology, put it like this:
The wartime efforts of Bell Labs in fire control contributed to a
new vision of technology, a vision that treated different types of
machinery (radar, amplifiers, electric motors, computers) in
analytically similar terms—paving the way for information
theory, systems engineering, and classical control theory. These
efforts produced not only new weapons but also a vision of
signals and systems. Through ideas and through people, this
vision diffused into engineering culture and solidified as the
technical and conceptual foundations of the information age.
In other words, the research may have paid immediate dividends,
but the real source of value was the analogy. Scientific breakthrough
by way of analogy has a rich history. It’s said that Galileo’s work on
pendulums began in a church in Pisa, where he stared at a lamp
swinging through the air and timed it with his pulse. Newton, of
course, had his apple. Einstein imagined himself chasing a beam of

light. As for Shannon: Wasn’t the work of tracking the evasive-yetpredictable path of an aircraft a rigorous training course in thinking
probabilistically? If the position of the aircraft was best understood in
that way—not in terms of where the target was, but in terms of where
it was most likely to be—what other elusive objects might be targeted
in the same way?
In Shannon’s report on the topic, cowritten with two other Labs
researchers, they acknowledge that the problem is a “special case of
the transmission, manipulation, and utilization of intelligence. . . . The
input data . . . are thought of constituting a series in time similar to
weather records, stock market prices, production statistics, and the
like.” That thought presaged a key insight of Shannon’s later work:
that sources of “intelligence” as disparate as the trajectory of a missile
and the output of a stock ticker, the pulses in a telegraph line and the
instructions in a cell nucleus, had something heretofore unsuspected
in common.

Those insights were still years away. What mattered in the here
and now for Shannon was that his work for the NDRC had impressed
the higher-ups. “He did some stunning work for us,” Weaver later said.
Fry, who had first seen Shannon in action during the summer of 1940,
now had ample evidence of Shannon’s promise. It didn’t take long for
him to extend a full-time offer to join Bell Laboratories as a research
mathematician.

For Shannon, the offer must have come as a relief—not just
professionally, but personally. The accounts of that time depict a man
on edge—and understandably so. The pressure of the war combined
with the collapse of his marriage had left Shannon shattered. “For a
time it looked as though he might completely crack up nervously and
emotionally,” Weaver remembered. “It is Thornton Fry who deserves
the primary credit for getting him out of that state, and for offering
him work in the Bell Laboratories. The rest of it is history.”

10
A Six-Day Workweek

This has not been a scientist’s war; it has been a war in which all
have had a part. The scientists, burying their old professional
competition in the demand of a common cause, have shared
greatly and learned much.
—Vannevar Bush

The Bell Labs headquarters in Manhattan’s West Village were a
scientific smorgasbord: chemical labs, vast production rooms, and “a
warren of testing labs for phones, cables, switches, cords, coils, and a
nearly uncountable assortment of other essential parts.” And now,
with a host of new wartime projects under way and hundreds of new
faces streaming through the office, including many in military
uniforms, the thirteen stories on the Hudson’s edge felt especially
chaotic. Even as several hundred Labs employees departed for activeduty service in the wake of Pearl Harbor, Bell’s in-house workforce
swelled: 4,600 employees became over 9,000 in only a matter of a few
years. More than 1,000 research projects were launched, each one a

small piece of the war machine. The tempo picked up accordingly; “a
six-day workweek became the norm,” Gertner writes.
Bell Labs wasn’t alone in feeling the pressures of the war. Conflict
overseas placed crushing new demands on much of the nation’s
scientific elite and the institutions that housed them. As Fred Kaplan
explained in his history of wartime science, “It was a war in which the
talents of scientists were exploited to an unprecedented, almost
extravagant degree.” There were urgent questions that needed
answers, and the scientifically literate were uniquely equipped to
answer them. Kaplan cataloged just a few:
How many tons of explosive force must a bomb release to create
a certain amount of damage to certain types of targets? In what
sorts of formation should bombers fly? Should an airplane be
heavily armored or should it be stripped of defenses so it can fly
faster? At what depths should an anti-submarine weapon
dropped from an airplane explode? How many anti-aircraft guns
should be placed around a critical target? In short, precisely how
should these new weapons be used to produce the greatest
military payoff?
A generation of physicists and mathematicians was unleashed on
puzzles like these.
One of the most insightful surveys of wartime mathematics comes
from J. Barkley Rosser, a University of Wisconsin professor who
interviewed some 200 mathematicians who, like him, had been

pressed into national service. Rosser concluded that mathematicians
acted as a kind of accelerant, helpful in speeding up research and
development that would otherwise have been painfully manual and
slow.
The attitude of many with the problems they were asked to
solve was that the given problem was not really mathematics
but, since an answer was needed, urgently and quickly, they got
on with it. . . . Without a person with competence to supply an
answer by mathematics, the person with the problem would
have had to resort to some scheme of experimental trial and
error. This could be very expensive. Worse still, it could be very
time-consuming, and everybody wished to get the War over as
quickly as possible. So though mathematicians turned up their
noses at most of the problems brought to them, they did so
privately, and labored enthusiastically to produce answers.
And so hundreds of the world’s top mathematical minds put their
personal research aside, swallowed various degrees of pride, and
gathered at the outposts of Los Alamos, Bletchley Park, Tuxedo Park
—and Bell Labs, where wartime contracts brought a fresh-fromfellowship Claude Shannon into contact with the latest in military
technology and thought.

For men like Vannevar Bush, James Conant, John von Neumann,
J. Robert Oppenheimer, and others, the war lifted the veil on their

work. They were invited into the councils of power, asked to advise
presidents, and tasked with steering millions of dollars of men and
matériel. Many of these men had made modest names for themselves
in the worlds of science and engineering, but in the arena of wartime
politics, their work would receive wide public recognition.
Shannon, too, might have entered this elite group—but he chose
not to. “He couldn’t care less about what was happening in Europe,”
his girlfriend at the time remembered. Unlike many of his
contemporaries, Shannon displayed no ambitions for the high-wire
world of government. He made no special effort to earn assignments
related to the war effort, nor did he go out of his way to play up his
fire control research. This wasn’t, as it might have been for some of
his less-sought-after contemporaries, for lack of access. With
Vannevar Bush as a trusted mentor and a resume fat with fellowships
and prestigious institutions, Shannon could have navigated his way to
the high government post of his choosing.
But he didn’t. If anything, his reaction to the war work was quite
the opposite: the whole atmosphere left a bitter taste. The secrecy,
the intensity, the drudgery, the obligatory teamwork—all of it seems
to have gotten to him in a deeply personal way. Indeed, one of the few
accounts available to us, from Claude’s girlfriend, suggests that he
found himself largely bored and frustrated by wartime projects, and
that the only outlet for his private research came on his own time,
late at night. “He said he hated it, and then he felt very guilty about
being tired out in the morning and getting there very late. . . . I took

him by the hand and sometimes I walked him to work—that made him
feel better.” It’s telling that Shannon was reluctant, even decades
later, to talk about this period in any kind of depth, even to family
and friends. In a later interview, he would simply say, with a touch of
disappointment in his words, that “those were busy times during the
war and immediately afterwards and [my research] was not considered
first priority work.” This was true, it appears, even at Bell Labs,
famously open-minded though it may have been.
There was something else, too: as Rosser suggested, the math
problems brought forth by the war were hardly math at all—or, at
least, they were beneath anyone considered worth working on them.
The defense establishment had, in a sense, overinvested in
brainpower. In Rosser’s words, one of his colleagues
insisted to his dying day . . . that he never did an iota of
mathematics during the War. True enough, the problems were
mostly very pedestrian stuff, as mathematics. I was never
required to appeal to the Gödel incompleteness theorem, or use
the ergodic theorem, or any other key results in that league. One
time the tedium was relieved when I had to do something with
orthogonal polynomials, and I was glad to get out the Szegoő
tome and bone up a bit. But mostly I was working out how fast
our rockets would go, and where. On a good day, some problem
would be up to the level of a junior course in mathematics.

Call it an extreme case of mathematical snobbery, but we can
imagine Shannon sharing the sentiment, even if he wasn’t willing to
write it down for posterity. Shannon, fresh from the tony confines of
Princeton and MIT and the exciting problems that had consumed his
young career, may well have considered it a step backward to
calculate where, when, and how large airborne objects went boom.
Yet in his fortunate life, surely one of Shannon’s great strokes of
luck was that he found his way to full-time work at Bell Labs not long
before the formal American entry into the war. Although he couldn’t
have known it then, his military research would prove to be more than
just a way of avoiding combat. His principal projects—secrecy systems
and cryptography—would introduce him to what cutting-edge
computer technology could achieve. Even if he came to all of it
reluctantly, he was exposed to it nonetheless. Only later would he
hint that it was in the war’s technologies that he began to see the
broad outlines of the technological progress to come—progress that
he, in his own way, would help bring to pass.

11
The Unspeakable System
Cryptography was the war’s white noise: it was ubiquitous, and yet
only those paying the closest attention could pick it up. It was one of
the least understood components of the war machine. Compared to,
say, the nuclear bomb, a visible and white-hot expression of the power
of physics, the products of cryptographic analysts were arcane and
mysterious—and kept classified for a generation or more.
From the war’s earliest days, the challenge of sending and receiving
coded messages—and of cracking the enemy’s messages—drew some
of the world’s finest minds in mathematics, science, and computing.
The technology called forth by the need to break codes was among
the war’s great triumphs. The cottage industry of computer code
names—ENIGMA, ENIAC, MANIAC, TUNNY, BOMBE, COLOSSUS,
SIGSALY, and so on—evinced a demand for codebreaking power that
was spurring a revolution in computing, presided over by secretive
intelligence bureaucracies.

But this deeply bureaucratic story is not how the tale of wartime
codebreaking is often told. Cryptography is made to seem like the
work of brilliant lone wolves, scribbling away in solitude. As Colin
Burke puts it in a National Security Agency history of cryptologic
efforts called It Wasn’t All Magic, “Such an image of a heroic
cryptanalysis is far from being true or useful. Cryptanalytic and
technological victories have not come as easily as that. . . . Typical
cryptanalysis was and remains a continuing struggle to discover
patterns and to make sense out of mountains of raw data.” Because
the cryptographic bureaucracies grew in secret, and because many of
their files still remain classified—Burke’s own history, completed in
1994, was only declassified in 2013—the actual substance of their
work wasn’t (and still isn’t) well understood by the public.
But it was always there, the dull background hum of the war: codes
broken, codes built, thousands of conversations deciphered, reams of
data and text sorted by hand and machine. The war for signals
intelligence was as much about code-making as it was about
codebreaking, as illustrated by one famous and tragic story. On the
morning of December 7, 1941, George Marshall, the Army’s chief of
staff, had an important message to send to his Pacific Command:
Japan had decided that it could no longer mediate its differences with
the United States through politics; war was likely. But how to transmit
this information? The only system available to the nation’s top
military and political leaders had long been considered insecure. The
message was sent instead by the comparatively slower radio telegraph.

Tragically, it arrived after the attack on Pearl Harbor was over. The
near destruction of the Pacific Fleet was, among much else, a wake-up
call to America’s code writers.
The Axis powers, too, set their finest minds and technologies to
work trying to intercept and decode enemy conversations. Walter
Schellenberg, the head of the Third Reich’s Foreign Intelligence
Service, details one such success late in the war:
Early in 1944 we hit a bull’s eye by tapping a telephone
conversation between Roosevelt and Churchill which was
overheard and deciphered by the giant German listening post in
Holland.

Though

the

conversation

was

scrambled,

we

unscrambled it by means of a highly complicated apparatus. It
lasted almost five minutes, and disclosed a crescendo of military
activity in Britain, thereby corroborating the many reports of
impending invasion. Had the two statesmen known that the
enemy was listening to their conversation, Roosevelt would
hardly have been likely to say good-bye to Churchill with the
words, “Well, we will do our best—now I will go fishing.”

Cryptology represents a problem of both software and hardware.
The “software” can, in principle, be anything. In one well-known
example, about 500 Navajo Indians were recruited in World War II to
transmit coded messages because their native tongue was complex
enough—and unfamiliar enough—to evade detection by the Axis

powers. That’s the essence of cryptology: a series of substitutions,
trades of one letter or word for another letter or word (or language).
Technology can help augment a code’s difficulty by ramping up the
complexity of the substitutions. And thus, advances in cryptographic
hardware rendered World War II–era codes exponentially more
complex. They enabled cryptographers, for instance, to easily encrypt
each letter of a message with a different cipher alphabet, which would
render the message as a whole far more resilient against codebreaking.
This was where Bell Labs entered the fight: what the country
needed was computing power of the sort that would enable more
efficient encryption of messages and speedier cracking of enemy
codes. One example was “Project X”—the most ambitious speechscrambling system of that era. It was initiated in the winter of 1940
and took on new urgency with the American entry into the war. The
project, also known as the SIGSALY system, consisted of “some forty
racks of vacuum tube–powered electrical equipment weighing about
fifty-five tons, taking up 2,500 square feet and requiring 30,000 watts
of power.” According to one estimate, the system had a $5,000,000
budget in 1943, and it employed a platoon of thirty workers. So secret
was the system’s internal logic that the patents associated with it
were not publicly divulged until 1976. To listen to a scrambled
message over its wires was to hear something that sounded “rather
like Rimsky-Korsakov’s bravura violin spectacular ‘The Flight of the
Bumblebee.’ ” To critics who thought the output curious or difficult to

understand, William Bennett, one of SIGSALY’s engineers, had a
prompt reply: “Accept distortion for security.”
In one sense, SIGSALY looked like caricature of a mid-century
computer: it occupied an entire room, demanded round-the-clock air
conditioning, and produced small outputs for the enormous inputs it
required. (This was an open joke: “Members working on the job
occasionally remarked about the terrible conversion ratio—30 kW of
power for 1 milliwatt of poor-quality speech.”) But on the other hand,
none of that mattered. Andrew Hodges, in his biography of Alan
Turing, noted the obvious reason why: “It worked, which was the main
thing. For the first time, secret speech could cross the Atlantic.”

At the heart of the SIGSALY system was a technology known as
the Vocoder. Its creator, later celebrated as an engineering genius,
almost didn’t become an engineer at all. Homer Dudley had ambitions
of becoming a teacher. He had even given it a try, teaching fifth
through eighth graders, and then high school students. While the
material was no difficulty for someone of his intellect, he was never
able to master the art of classroom discipline. Dudley discovered, like
many a teacher before and since, that the real challenge lay in
maintaining order among the prepubescent—and that he wasn’t up to
it. So he abandoned teaching to study electrical engineering, joining
the technical department of Western Electric, the precursor of Bell
Labs. It was a more auspicious career choice: over four decades, his

work on telephony and speech synthesis resulted in thirty-seven
patents.
Unbeknownst to him at the time, his most significant achievement
would have global implications. Dudley hypothesized that the sounds
of the human voice could be mimicked by machine: if the human
voice was, at the most basic level, merely a series of vibrations in the
air, there was no reason why those vibrations could not be
mechanically reproduced. Setting out to test his premise, he built a
pair of machines that did just that: one to encode speech
electronically (the Vocoder, short for “Voice Encoder”), and one to
reverse the process and output machine-generated speech (the Voder,
or “Voice Operation Demonstrator”). Vannevar Bush was in the
audience for the latter’s debut at the 1939 World’s Fair, where it
proved a hit. As he recalled,
At a recent world fair a machine called a Voder was shown. A
girl stroked its keys and it emitted recognizable speech. No
human vocal cords entered into the procedure at any point; the
keys simply combined some electrically produced vibrations
and passed these on to a loudspeaker. In the Bell Laboratories
there is the converse of this machine, called a Vocoder. The
loudspeaker is replaced by a microphone, which picks up sound.
Speak to it, and the corresponding keys move.
Only later was Dudley’s invention pressed into military service. In
creating data out of the human voice, the Vocoder became a perfect

building block for SIGSALY’s engineers. One of the central challenges
of a code-writing system is this: each new letter or word introduced
into a message opens up a fresh possibility of detection by the enemy;
the less that’s communicated, in other words, the better. Because the
Vocoder attempted to encode and reproduce vowels and consonants
with as little energy consumed as possible, it wrung a great deal of the
redundancy out of human speech; the result was an economy of
information transmitted. In other words, what was encoded was only
what was needed, nothing more, thus reducing the amount of
information that would be liable to decryption by the enemy.
The challenge of communicating a maximum of information with a
minimum risk of detection was deadly serious, one of the most urgent
and complex wartime problems. Bell Labs was one of the national
leaders in such work, even winning awards in the field, including “Best
Signal Processing Technology” in 1946. SIGSALY remained classified,
so none of its inner workings were disclosed to the awards ceremony
audience. But the Labs’ representative did accept the honor with an
encrypted phone call: “Phrt fdygui jfsowria meeqm wuiosn jxolwps
fuekswusjnvkci! Thank you!”

Shannon, for his part, was one of a team of almost thirty people
working on the many pieces of the SIGSALY project. He was tasked
with checking the algorithms that would allow the message to be
suitably and securely reproduced on the receiving end. So secret was
SIGSALY that, even as a member of the project team, Shannon was

not told what all his number-crunching was for. But the work gave
him a window into the world of encoded speech, transmission of
information, and cryptography—a synthesis that, at that moment in
history, may not have taken place anywhere other than at Bell Labs.
As Shannon observed, “not a lot of laboratories had voice encoding
devices for scrambling speech.”
Shannon would observe later that cryptography was “a very down
to earth discipline, how the cryptographer should go to work and what
he should do.” But much of Shannon’s work wasn’t designed for
cryptographers. When Shannon worked on encryption outside the
confines of the SIGSALY project, he was writing more for an audience
of “mathematicians or philosophers of cryptography” than for handson code writers. As he himself admitted, his cryptography paper
“didn’t get as much good response . . . as I expected from the
cryptographers.”A later writer would admit that Shannon’s paper on
the topic of cryptography had “the feel of a what-can-I-contribute-tothe-war-effort undertaking of which there must have been many.”
As in other areas of Shannon’s life, his most important work in
cryptography yielded a rigorous, theoretical underpinning for many of
a

field’s

key

concepts.

Shannon’s

exposure

to

day-to-day

cryptographic work during the war, it seems, was important—but its
primary purpose was as grist for a paper that would only be published
in classified form on September 1, 1945—one day before the Japanese
surrender was signed. This paper, “A Mathematical Theory of
Cryptography—Case 20878,” contained important antecedents of

Shannon’s later work—but it also provided the first-ever proof of a
critical concept in cryptology: the “one-time pad.”
The one-time pad system was the conceptual basis of Bell Labs’
Vocoder, though it was first devised as early as 1882. It requires that a
coded message be preceded by the key to decode it, that the key be a
secret, entirely random set of symbols the same size as the message,
and that the key be used only once. It took Claude Shannon, and the
space of more than a half century, to prove that a code constructed
under these stringent (and usually impracticable) conditions would be
entirely unbreakable—that perfect secrecy within a cryptographic
system was, at least in theory, possible. Even with unlimited
computing power, the enemy could never crack a code built on such a
foundation.
Shannon’s cryptographic work was released into the dark of the
intelligence apparatus, a world of classifications and secrecy where
the work’s reception was concealed even from its author. Of the
people in this world, Shannon would say: “They were not a very
talkative bunch, you could say that. They were the most secretive
bunch of people in the world. It’s very hard to even find out for
example who are the important cryptographers in this country.” The
paper would not be available to a wider audience for another five
years. The work’s true import, in the end, was not in the creation of an
invincible code, but rather in the way that its suppressed insights
ultimately resurfaced, at the heart of Shannon’s revolutionary theory

of information: “It was a great flow of ideas from one to the other,
back and forth.”

12
Turing
Shannon’s cryptography work had one other lasting import: it
brought him into contact with another giant of the digital age, Alan
Turing. In 1942, Turing came to America as a part of a governmentinitiated tour of military encryption projects. By this point, his
reputation

preceded

him.

He

had

demonstrated

astonishing

mathematical precocity in primary school; mastered Einstein’s work
by sixteen; and by twenty-three had been elected a fellow of King’s
College, Cambridge. In 1936, he dreamed up the Turing Machine, a
landmark thought experiment that served as the theoretical
underpinning of the modern computer.
Turing had also begun the codebreaking that would make him a
world-historic figure. It was cryptography that had brought him to the
United States, on orders to connect with American counterparts, meet
the military leaders in the space, and inspect the American machinery
for quality and security. This extended to, among other projects,
SIGSALY; if British leaders were to be on the receiving end of its

buzzing, Dr. Turing would have to give his stamp of approval that the
system was unbreakable.
The secrecy of the subject matter, the reputations of Turing and
Shannon, and the atmosphere of the war has lent this meeting of the
minds an air of intrigue and mystery. But there was nothing cloakand-dagger about their interactions. According to Turing’s biographer,
Andrew Hodges, Shannon and Turing met daily over tea, in public, in
the conspicuously modest Bell Labs cafeteria. Turing was envious, in a
way, of Shannon’s multifaceted career: “Here [Turing] met a person
who had been able to take the part of an academic, philosophical
engineer, the role that Alan might have liked had the English system
allowed for it.” Shannon, for his part, was amazed by the quality of
Turing’s thinking. “I think Turing had a great mind, a very great mind,”
Shannon later said.
Neither left a record of their conversations, but we do know the
one topic they avoided. “We talked not at all about cryptography. . . . I
don’t think we exchanged word one about cryptography,” Shannon
explained. Asked whether or not he knew what Turing was working
on, Shannon responded that he only knew it in broad strokes.
“Certainly not the nitty gritty. I knew or surmised what he was
doing. . . . I had no concept of the Enigma machine. . . . I didn’t know
of that nor that he was a crucial figure in it.” The interviewer pressed
him, asking him why Shannon, with his own passion for and
experience in cryptographic puzzles, wouldn’t have probed Turing

further. Shannon’s response was simple and to the point: “Well, in the
wartime you didn’t ask too many questions.”
To some, Shannon and Turing’s professed ignorance of the other’s
work might seem like a pair of codebreakers smartly covering the
tracks of their relationship. But it’s entirely plausible that neither man
wished to put the other in an uncomfortable or compromised
position. The work on both sides was highly classified. The
information they had each been given was, if not for their eyes only,
certainly for those of a limited audience. It’s no surprise that, given a
break from their labors over tea and cake, the two men would spend
time talking about anything other than the work that occupied their
days.
Another reason: questions about how much the Americans were
willing to share with the British were still up in the air. Even for
someone of Turing’s stature and reputation, obtaining the relevant
clearances for his American trip had been an ordeal. He had,
amazingly enough, been detained by the American authorities on
arrival: “I reached New York on Friday November 12th. I was all but
kept on Ellis Island by the Immigration Authorities who were very
snooty about my carrying no orders and no evidence to connect me
with the F.O. [Foreign Office].”
Months earlier, the American general Rex Minckler had rejected
Turing’s application to enter Bell Laboratories. Though the application
was, at length, finally approved, it only marked the beginning of a

protracted

tussle

with

the

Bell

Labs

and

national

security

bureaucracies. Turing wrote:
I had been intending to report to Potter at Bell Laboratories
without any more formality than a preliminary phone call. This
was apparently all wrong. . . . There was some trouble because
no

arrangements

for

me

to

see

anything

other

than

unscrambling projects had been confirmed in writing, whereas I
had come out on the understanding that I was to see everything
there was in the way of speech secrecy work. . . . [I] immediately
came up against a veto on any British people visiting anything at
all in the speech scrambling line. Captain Hastings then took a
hand, and brought the pressure to bear on General Colton, and
all now seems to be well.
Turing wasn’t alone in his aggravation with the Americans, nor did
that frustration limit itself to immigration and security clearance
snafus. Though the Allied forces had been working together in the
war effort since the Lend-Lease Act, they didn’t always see eye to eye
on cryptographic matters.
Competing systems, methods, and personalities left the two sides
perpetually suspicious of one another; tempers ran short, and egos
bruised easily. The conflict was due, in part, to essential differences
between the American and British war machines, and to their
“incomplete alliance.” For all their ramp-up in industrial production of
military goods, the British simply could not keep pace with the

Americans in scale or speed. Turing saw this firsthand, and his respect
for American brains was, in some ways, the inverse of his respect for
American brawn. After a visit to the Navy Department, for instance,
he wrote: “I am persuaded that one cannot very well trust these
people where a matter of judgment in cryptography is concerned.”
Still, “I think we can make quite a lot of use of their machinery.”
That attitude of qualified mistrust was common on both sides.
Certain British successes in codebreaking, for instance, were kept
hidden from the Americans, and Turing did not have a clear sense of
what he was and was not allowed to share with his hosts. Already
known for his brusque, off-putting manner, Turing wasn’t going to
ingratiate himself with the Americans when the very purpose of his
mission was so clouded with uncertainty, nor was he the kind of
natural diplomat capable of finessing the problem.

But in a way, the bad feelings between the two sides, and the
muzzles placed on both Shannon and Turing, freed the pair to talk
about their other common interests. A friendship blossomed where
only a modest professional relationship might have sprung up had
they been freer to talk about cryptographic matters. Even before the
war

years,

both

Turing

and

Shannon

had

shared

similar

extracurricular enthusiasms, and both had been dancing around the
same set of cutting-edge ideas. Over their cups of tea, remembered
Shannon, “we would talk about mathematical subjects.” In particular,
thinking machines were much on the two men’s minds—in Shannon’s

words, “the notion of building computers that will think and what you
can do with computers and all that.” He went on:
Turing and I had an awful lot in common, and we would talk
about that kind of question. He had already written his famous
paper about Turing Machines, so called, as they call them now,
Turing Machines. They didn’t call them that then. And we spent
much time discussing the concepts of what’s in the human
brain. How the brain is built, how it works and what can be done
with machines and whether you can do anything with machines
that you can do with the human brain and so on. And that kind
of thing. And I had talked to him several times about my notions
on Information Theory, I know, and he was interested in those.
They were, both, taken by the promise of early computing and
intrigued by the idea of chess-playing computers. Here’s Shannon in
1977:
Well, back in ’42 . . . computers were just emerging, so to speak.
They had things like the ENIAC down at University of
Pennsylvania. . . . Now they were slow, they were very
cumbersome and huge and all, there were computers that would
fill a couple rooms this size and they would have about the
ability of one of the little calculators that you can buy now for
$10. But nevertheless we could see the potential of this, the
thing that happened here if things ever got cheaper and we
could ever make the uptime better, sort of keep the machines

working for more than ten minutes, things like that. It was
really very exciting.
We had dreams, Turing and I used to talk about the
possibility of simulating entirely the human brain, could we
really get a computer which would be the equivalent of the
human brain or even a lot better? And it seemed easier then
than it does now maybe. We both thought that this should be
possible in not very long, in ten or 15 years. Such was not the
case, it hasn’t been done in thirty years.
At his core, Shannon was a private person, with fewer confidants
than his stature within the scientific community might suggest. In a
life of exposure to many of the world’s leading scientists,
mathematicians, and thinkers, Shannon always gave the impression of
a wallflower, someone who may have found himself in the same
conference halls as many of the luminaries of his day but generally
waited for the conversation to come to him. He wasn’t a steady
correspondent with the major figures he knew, attended only a
fraction of the conferences to which he was invited, and was the sort
of person for whom the concept of “networking” was distasteful when
applied to anything other than telephone lines. All of which is to say
that the fact he connected as enthusiastically as he did with Turing is
as remarkable as anything the pair discussed. That Shannon could, in
the brief few months they had together at Bell Labs, win Turing’s
confidence and friendship says a great deal about each man’s high
opinion of the other. Turing was, in Shannon’s words, “a very, very

impressive guy.” Turing even visited Shannon at home, a rarity for a
host who so preferred his own company—and a guest who did, too.
After Turing’s return to Great Britain, he and Shannon met one
final time, in the war’s aftermath. In 1950, Claude traveled to London
for a conference and took time to visit Turing and his laboratory. As
Shannon remembered:
While there we went over to Turing’s Laboratory in Manchester
at the University of Manchester. . . . He was interested in
programming a computer for chess, which . . . was a problem
that had interested me a great deal. And he was working away
with programming a computer at this time. And he had an office
up there, and there was a computer downstairs. This was in the
early days of computers.
The two discussed Turing’s efforts at programming. Even decades
later, Shannon would recall one of Turing’s inventions:
So I asked him what he was doing. And he said he was trying to
find a way to get better feedback from a computer so he would
know what was going on inside the computer. And he’d invented
this wonderful command. See, in those days they were working
with individual commands. And the idea was to discover good
commands.
And I said, what is the command? And he said, the command
is put a pulse to the hooter, put a pulse to the hooter. Now let

me translate that. A hooter . . . in England is a loudspeaker. And
by putting a pulse to it, it would just be put a pulse to a hooter.
Now what good is this crazy command? Well, the good of this
command is that if you’re in a loop you can have this command
in that loop and every time it goes around the loop it will put a
pulse in and you will hear a frequency equal to how long it takes
to go around that loop. And then you can put another one in
some bigger loop and so on. And so you’ll hear all of this coming
on and you’ll hear this “boo boo boo boo boo boo,” and his
concept was that you would soon learn to listen to that and
know whether when it got hung up in a loop or something else
or what it was doing all this time, which he’d never been able to
tell before.
It was an altogether enjoyable visit, a postwar reunion for two of
the founders of the Information Age. It was also the last time that
they would speak in person. Four years after Shannon’s visit, Turing—
following a conviction for “gross indecency” at a time when
homosexuality was criminalized—died of cyanide poisoning. His death
was ruled a suicide, though its circumstances remain in dispute to this
day.

13
Manhattan

The ancient art of mathematics . . . does not reward speed so
much as patience, cunning and, perhaps most surprising of all, the
sort of gift for collaboration and improvisation that characterizes
the best jazz musicians.
—Gareth Cook

With his marriage to Norma over, Shannon was a bachelor again, with
no attachments, a small Greenwich Village apartment, and a
demanding job. His evenings were mostly his own, and if there’s a
moment in Shannon’s life when he was at his most freewheeling, this
was it. He kept odd hours, played music too loud, and relished the
New York jazz scene. He went out late for raucous dinners and
dropped by the chess clubs in Washington Square Park. He rode the A
train up to Harlem to dance the jitterbug and take in shows at the
Apollo. He went swimming at a pool in the Village and played tennis
at the courts along the Hudson River’s edge. Once, he tripped over the
tennis net, fell hard, and had to be stitched up.

His home, on the third floor of 51 West Eleventh Street, was a
small New York studio. “There was a bedroom on the way to the
bathroom. It was old. It was a boardinghouse . . . it was quite
romantic,” recalled Maria Moulton, the downstairs neighbor. Perhaps
somewhat

predictably,

Shannon’s

space

was

a

mess:

dusty,

disorganized, with the guts of a large music player he had taken apart
strewn about on the center table. “In the winter it was cold, so he took
an old piano he had and chopped it up and put it in the fireplace to
get some heat.” His fridge was mostly empty, his record player and
clarinet among the only prized possessions in the otherwise spartan
space. Claude’s apartment faced the street. The same apartment
building housed Claude Levi-Strauss, the great anthropologist. Later,
Levi-Strauss would find that his work was influenced by the work of
his former neighbor, though the two rarely interacted while under the
same roof.
Though the building’s live-in super and housekeeper, Freddy,
thought Shannon morose and a bit of a loner, Shannon did befriend
and date his neighbor Maria. They met when the high volume of his
music finally forced her to knock on his door; a friendship, and a
romantic relationship, blossomed from her complaint.
Maria encouraged him to dress up and hit the town. “Now this is
good!” he would exclaim when a familiar tune hit the radio on their
drives. He read to her from James Joyce and T. S. Eliot, the latter his
favorite author. He was, she remembered, preoccupied with the math
problems he worked over in the evenings, and he was prone to writing

down stray equations on napkins at restaurants in the middle of
meals. He had few strong opinions about the war or politics, but many
about this or that jazz musician. “He would find these common
denominators between the musicians he liked and the ones I liked,”
she remembered. He had become interested in William Sheldon’s
theories about body types and their accompanying personalities, and
he looked to Sheldon to understand his own rail-thin (in Sheldon’s
term, ectomorphic) frame.
A few Bell Labs colleagues became Shannon’s closest friends. One
was Barney Oliver. Tall, with an easy smile and manner, he enjoyed
scotch and storytelling. Oliver’s easygoing nature concealed an
intense intellect: “Barney was an intellect in the genius range, with a
purported IQ of 180,” recalled one colleague. His interests spanned
heaven and earth—literally. In time, he would become one of the
leaders of the movement in the search for extraterrestrial life. Tom
Perkins, cofounder of the famed Kleiner Perkins venture capital firm,
remembered Oliver’s ability to seize on a topic, no matter how
obscure. “If the prospect of building devices to communicate with
dolphins captured his fancy, that’s what he did for months on end,”
Perkins recalled. He was the brains behind “Project Cyclops,” the
“ingenious and noble albeit unfulfilled” plan to connect 1,000 100meter satellite dishes across a thirty-six-square-mile stretch of land
with the goal of amplifying radio waves enough to detect interstellar
chatter.

Oliver’s earthbound pursuits were equally ambitious. They included
“the world’s first programmable desktop calculator,” its handheld
offspring, and the first Hewlett-Packard computer. Oliver also held
the distinction of being one of the few to hear about Shannon’s ideas
before they ever saw the light of day. As he proudly recalled later, “We
became friends and so I was the mid-wife for a lot of his theories. He
would bounce them off me, you know, and so I understood
information theory before it was ever published.” That might have
been a mild boast on Oliver’s part, but given the few people Shannon
let into even the periphery of his thinking, it was notable that
Shannon talked with him about work at all.
John Pierce was another of the Bell Labs friends whose company
Shannon shared in the off hours. At the Labs, Pierce “had developed a
wide circle of devoted admirers, charmed by his wit and his lively
mind.” He was Shannon’s mirror image in his thin figure and height—
and in his tendency to become quickly bored of anything that didn’t
intensely hold his interest. This extended to people. “It was quite
common for Pierce to suddenly enter or leave a conversation or a
meal halfway through,” wrote Jon Gertner. It was the by-product of a
blazing fast mind. Early in his education, Pierce had so impressed the
professor of his engineering class that he was promoted, mid-course,
from student to teacher. At the Labs, Pierce acquired a similar
reputation. He was known for having a knack for invention that was
on par with the Labs’ best.

Shannon and Pierce were intellectual sparring partners in the way
only two intellects of their kind could be. They traded ideas, wrote
papers together, and shared countless books over the course of their
tenures at Bell Labs. One story, from a speech Pierce gave, illustrates
their collaborations:
One day I was talking casually with Claude Shannon, and he
described to me in a few words the system a worker outside of
the Bell Laboratories had devised. I didn’t pay much attention
while he was talking, but something of what he had said stayed
with me. Then, later in the day, I saw certain advantages of this
new system. The next day I went to see Claude and told him
that this was a fine idea. As I explained the advantages, he
agreed, but he observed that the system I was describing wasn’t
the one he had told me about at all. I had invented a new system
by listening carelessly and pursuing my own thoughts.
Pierce told Shannon on numerous occasions that “he should write
up this or that idea.” To which Shannon is said to have replied, with
characteristic insouciance, “What does ‘should’ mean?”
Oliver, Pierce, and Shannon—a genius clique, each secure enough in
his own intellect to find comfort in the company of the others. They
shared a fascination with the emerging field of digital communication
and cowrote a key paper explaining its advantages in accuracy and
reliability. One contemporary remembered this about the three Bell
Labs wunderkinds:

It turns out that there were three certified geniuses at BTL [Bell
Telephone Laboratories] at the same time, Claude Shannon of
information theory fame, John Pierce, of communication
satellite and traveling wave amplifier fame, and Barney.
Apparently the three of those people were intellectually
INSUFFERABLE. They were so bright and capable, and they cut
an intellectual swath through that engineering community, that
only a prestige lab like that could handle all three at once.
Other accounts suggest that Shannon might not have been so
“insufferable” as he was impatient. His colleagues remembered him as
friendly but removed. To Maria, he confessed a frustration with the
more quotidian elements of life at the Labs. “I think it made him sick,”
she said. “I really do. That he had to do all that work while he was so
interested in pursuing his own thing.”
Partly, it seems, the distance between Shannon and his colleagues
was a matter of sheer processing speed. In the words of Brockway
McMillan, who occupied the office next door to Shannon’s, “he had a
certain type of impatience with the type of mathematical argument
that was fairly common. He addressed problems differently from the
way most people did, and the way most of his colleagues did. . . . It was
clear that a lot of his argumentation was, let’s say, faster than his
colleagues could follow.” What others saw as reticence, McMillan saw
as a kind of ambient frustration: “He didn’t have much patience with
people who weren’t as smart as he was.”

It gave him the air of a man in a hurry, perhaps too much in a hurry
to be collegial. He was “a very odd man in so many ways. . . . He was
not an unfriendly person,” observed David Slepian, another Labs
colleague. Shannon’s response to colleagues who could not keep pace
was simply to forget about them. “He never argued his ideas. If people
didn’t believe in them, he ignored those people,” McMillan told
Gertner.
George Henry Lewes once observed that “genius is rarely able to
give an account of its own processes.” This seems to have been true of
Shannon, who could neither explain himself to others, nor cared to. In
his work life, he preferred solitude and kept his professional
associations to a minimum. “He was terribly, terribly secretive,”
remembered Moulton. Robert Fano, a later collaborator of Shannon,
said, “he was not someone who would listen to other people about
what to work on.” One mark of this, some observed, was how few of
Shannon’s papers were coauthored.
Shannon wouldn’t have been the first genius with an inwardlooking temperament, but even among the brains of Bell Labs, he was
a man apart. “He wouldn’t have been in any other department
successfully. . . . You would knock on the door and he would talk to
you, but otherwise, he kept to himself,” McMillan said. Slepian would
put his apartness still more colorfully: “My characterization of his
smartness is that he would have been the world’s best con man if he
had taken a turn in that direction.” (“He would have taken that as a big
compliment,” his daughter later said.)

There was something else, too, something that might have kept
him at a remove from even his close colleagues: Shannon was
moonlighting. On the evenings he was at home, Shannon was at work
on a private project. It had begun to crystallize in his mind in his
graduate school days. He would, at various points, suggest different
dates of provenance. But whatever the date on which the idea first
implanted itself in his mind, pen hadn’t met paper in earnest until
New York and 1941. Now this noodling was both a welcome
distraction from work at Bell Labs and an outlet to the deep
theoretical work he prized so much, and which the war threatened to
foreclose. Reflecting on this time later, he remembered the flashes of
intuition. The work wasn’t linear; ideas came when they came. “These
things sometimes . . . one night I remember I woke up in the middle of
the night and I had an idea and I stayed up all night working on that.”
To picture Shannon during this time is to see a thin man tapping a
pencil against his knee at absurd hours. This isn’t a man on a deadline;
it’s something more like a man obsessed with a private puzzle, one
that is years in the cracking. “He would go quiet, very very quiet. But
he didn’t stop working on his napkins,” said Maria. “Two or three days
in a row. And then he would look up, and he’d say, ‘Why are you so
quiet?’ ”
Napkins decorate the table, strands of thought and stray sections
of equations accumulate around him. He writes in neat script on lined
paper, but the raw material is everywhere. Eight years like this—
scribbling, refining, crossing out, staring into a thicket of equations,

knowing that, at the end of all that effort, they may reveal nothing.
There are breaks for music and cigarettes, and bleary-eyed walks to
work in the morning, but mostly it’s this ceaseless drilling. Back to the
desk, where he senses, perhaps, that he is on to something significant,
something even more fundamental than the master’s thesis that made
his name—but what?

2

14
The Utter Dark

“Repeat, please.”
“Please send slower for the present.”
“How?”
“How do you receive?”
“Send slower.”
“Please send slower.”
“How do you receive?”
“Please say if you can read this.”
“Can you read this?”
“Yes.”
“How are signals?”
“Do you receive?”
“Please send something.”
“Please send V’s and B’s.”
“How are signals?”

Two and a half thousand tons of copper and iron had been strung
two thousand miles across an ocean at the cost of millions of pounds
and near shipwreck in order to act as conduit for the sputtering piece
of failure you read above. That text represents an entire day’s
conversation across the great transatlantic telegraph cable, which, in
the late summer of 1858, linked Europe to North America for twentyeight days. The first message launched fireworks and knighthoods and
euphoric editorials (“The Atlantic is dried up,” announced the Times of
London), but soon noise consumed the signal, and the wire went dead
for hours at a time. Buried under three miles of water—sunk, in
Kipling’s words, “Down to the dark, to the utter dark, where the blind
white sea-snakes are”—the cable was falling apart.
For the sake of those twenty-eight days of sporadic talk, BritishAmerican naval convoys had set out five separate times, unwinding
the cable foot by foot as they steamed east across the Atlantic. On the
fourth attempt, the ships were slammed by an historically ferocious
storm. The British ship Agamemnon, a wooden vessel outfitted with
both steam and sail, was caught in a weeklong gale, lurching from side
to side by as many as 45 degrees, unbalanced by the tons of metal on
her deck and in her hold—coils, wrote a nauseous newspaper
correspondent on board, that resembled “nothing so much as a cargo
of live eels.” Four times the cable snapped. Only on the fifth voyage
did it hold.
On each attempt, the most important passenger was a scientist who
has already figured in this story: William Thomson, the future Lord

Kelvin. His analog computer was two decades to come; in those days
he was comparatively little known, and still without his Neptunian
beard. But he was one of the world’s leading experts on the wire
transmission of information, though he didn’t use that word. He had
staked his reputation on the transatlantic project and been voted onto
its board of directors as a scientific advisor; he served on each voyage,
even the nearly fatal one, unpaid. An Australian reporter on board for
the fifth attempt captured his mood when, in the middle of the night,
electric current in the cable ceased and it looked to have snapped
again: “The very thought of disaster seemed to overpower him. His
hand shook so much that he could scarcely adjust his eyeglasses. The
veins on his forehead were swollen. His face was deathly pale . . . yet
in mind keen and collected, testing and waiting.” But soon enough the
signal came back to life, and Kelvin burst into laughter. A week later,
the hills of County Kerry rose on the eastern horizon, and the cable
was hauled onto the Irish shore, to be linked up with the European
network.
A month later, it was inert junk on the bottom of the sea, destroyed
by a disagreement.
Even before the Atlantic cable was laid, it was clear that messages
sent through any underwater lines—across the English Channel, for
instance—were especially prone to delay and distortion: transmitting
a message through water is uniquely difficult. Because water,
especially saltwater, is a natural conductor of electricity, a submerged
cable is prone to find its electrical current leaching away. Compared

to the signal borne by a dry cable, the signal sent along the length of a
wet cable is far harder to discern.
No one understood this dilemma better than Thomson; it was, in
large part, why he was aboard the Agamemnon to see the cable laid.
Three years before the last sailing, his laboratory experiments in
Glasgow had led him to argue that electrical transmission at a distance
obeyed a “law of squares”: the arrival time of a message increased with
the square of the cable’s length. Further, the signal’s strength would
grow increasingly attenuated the farther it had to travel. And if all of
this were the case, then the only hope of reliable undersea
communication was the thickest, best insulated—and most expensive
—cable that had ever been constructed, paired with sensitive
equipment to pick up faint signals at the far end.
But in 1858, in the absence of an ocean-spanning cable to put them
to the test, those conclusions were very much in doubt. Strong
financial incentives pushed the transatlantic project’s backers to
disregard Thomson: fortunes had begun to hang on the prospect of
instantaneous communication across the ocean (imagine what a
stockjobber in London could do with instant knowledge of commodity
prices in Chicago), and Thomson’s results came with the dispiriting
warning that a truly reliable cable might cost more than it was worth.
As misfortune would have it, Thomson’s chief doubter was also his
coworker: the head electrician of the transatlantic project.
Dr. O. E. Wildman Whitehouse was a retired surgeon and amateur
electrical experimenter. That should not necessarily be counted as a

slur on his expertise—the nineteenth century was a great age of
gentleman amateurs. Against Thomson’s university prestige, however,
Whitehouse staked a frankly populist claim: he announced that the
study of electricity and communication “is no longer the exclusive
privilege of the philosopher.” On the strength of his own flurry of
experiments, he denounced the law of squares as “a fiction of the
schools”: a formula built for elegance in the pages of journals (it even
looked like Newton’s famous inverse-square law of gravity!), but one
that fell apart in practice. Thomson struck the correct poses of
Victorian decorum in response, but on his own copy of Whitehouse’s
work, he scribbled that it was “fallacious in almost every point.”
Where Thomson’s results demanded a sturdier cable and finer signal
detection, Whitehouse’s called for brute force. As a later writer
summed up his solution: “The further the electricity has to travel, the
larger the kick it needs to send it on its way.” To overcome distortion
and delay, simply apply more power: it had the virtue of simplicity,
and it underbid Thomson’s plan, an inestimable advantage for a
project that would live or die on the strength of the investments it
could command.
In the end, it was a draw, and a farce. Thomson’s “mirror
galvanometer,” his device for picking up faint electric signals, was
installed at both ends, and disconnected by Whitehouse at every
opportunity. The cable itself was built well below his standard of
robustness. At the eastern end, on Valentia Island off the Irish coast,
was Whitehouse—hooking up his massive, five-foot-long spark coils

to push the signal through, and pumping electricity into the wire in
2,000-volt bursts.
Hauled in and out of ship holds, on and off decks, unwound and
rewound, dropped to the seabed, snapped four times, spliced and
respliced, the cable was already well punished by the time the first
signal was sent. Now, subjected to Whitehouse’s electrical barrage, its
insulation fried and gave out in a matter of days. The last sorry
message received at Valentia read: “Forty-eight words. Right. Right.”
Most of the messages sent and received on the celebrated wire were
just like that: communications about communication, telegraphy as
an especially bleak Samuel Beckett play.
Disobeying company orders, Whitehouse had a section of cable
hauled up two miles offshore, searching for a wiring fault on which he
could blame the breakdown; in the signal’s last days, he was fired for
insubordination. A postmortem parliamentary report made him the
face of the failure (though scholars have argued more recently that
the cable, in bad condition from the start, was bound to fail
eventually). Some newspapers treated the entire existence of the
transatlantic telegraph as a hoax or an investment scam. For the next
six years, communications across the ocean would be carried much as
they had been for the previous four hundred, on boats. Not until 1866
was a cable laid that held.
And were all of these lessons on the minds of Claude Shannon and
his colleagues, ninety years later? Very much so: when Arthur C.
Clarke

paused

from

science

fiction

to

write

a

history

of

communication beginning with the transatlantic cable, he dedicated it
to Shannon’s boss at Bell Labs, John Pierce, who “bullied” him into the
project. In particular, the fiasco of the telegraph helped to crystallize
three enduring lessons that would remain at the heart of
communications science long after its details were forgotten, and long
after the specific problem of transatlantic telegraphy had been
tolerably solved.
First, communication is a war against noise. Noise is interference
between

telephone

wires,

or

static

that

interrupts

a

radio

transmission, or a telegraph signal corrupted by failing insulation and
decaying on its way across an ocean. It is the randomness that creeps
into our conversations, accidentally or deliberately, and blocks our
understanding.

Across

short

distances,

or

over

relatively

uncomplicated media—Bell calling Watson from the next room, or a
landline telegraph from London to Manchester—noise could be coped
with. But as distances increased and the means of sending and storing
messages proliferated, the problems of noise grew with them. And the
provisional solutions—whether closer to Thomson’s solution of
listening more closely or Whitehouse’s solution of shouting louder—
were ad hoc and distinct from source to source, put into practice as
engineers stumbled upon them. At certain distances, or in certain
channels of communication, perfect accuracy looked impossible:
communication would be permanently linked to doubt. Until Claude
Shannon, few people, if any, suspected that there could be a unified
answer to noise.

Second, there are limits to brute force. Applying more power,
amplifying messages, strengthening signals—Whitehouse’s solution to
the telegraph problem—remained the most intuitive answer to noise.
Its failure in 1858 discredited Whitehouse but not the outlines of his
methods; few others were available. Yet there were high costs to
shouting. In the best case, it was still expensive and energy-hungry. In
the worst case, as with the undersea cable, it could destroy the
medium of communication itself.
Third, what hope there was of doing better lay in investigating the
boundaries between the hard world of physics and the invisible world
of messages. The object of study was the relationship between the
qualities of messages—their susceptibility to noise, the density of
their content, their speed, their accuracy—and the physical media
that carried them. Thomson’s proposed law of squares was one of the
earliest links in that chain of thought. But such a law addressed only
the movement of electricity, not the nature of the messages it carried.
How could science speak of such a thing? It could track the speed of
electrons in a wire, but the idea that the message they represented
could be measured and manipulated with comparable precision would
have to wait until the next century. Information was old. A science of
information was just beginning to stir.

15
From Intelligence to Information
Information was something guessed at rather than spoken of,
something implied in a dozen ways before it was finally tied down.
Information was a presence offstage. It was there in the studies of the
physiologist Hermann von Helmholtz, who, electrifying frog muscles,
first timed the speed of messages in animal nerves just as Thomson
was timing the speed of messages in wires. It was there in the work of
physicists like Rudolf Clausius and Ludwig Boltzmann, who were
pioneering ways to quantify disorder—entropy—little suspecting that
information might one day be quantified in the same way. Above all,
information was in the networks that descended in part from that
first attempt to bridge the Atlantic. In the attack on the practical
engineering problems of connecting Points A and B—what is the
smallest number of wires we need to string up to handle a day’s load
of messages? how do we encrypt a top-secret telephone call?—the
properties of information itself, in general, were gradually uncovered.

By the time of Claude Shannon’s childhood, the world’s
communications networks were no longer passive wires acting as
conduits for electricity, a kind of electron plumbing, as they were in
Thomson’s day. They were continent-spanning machines, arguably
the most complex machines in existence. Vacuum-tube amplifiers
strung along the telephone lines added power to voice signals that
would have otherwise attenuated and died out on their thousand-mile
journeys. A year before Shannon was born, in fact, Bell and Watson
inaugurated the transcontinental phone line by reenacting their first
call, this time with Bell in New York and Watson in San Francisco. By
the time Shannon was a young wig-wag signaling champion, feedback
systems managed the phone network’s amplifiers automatically,
holding the voice signals stable and silencing the “howling” or
“singing” noises that plagued early phone calls, even as the seasons
turned and the weather changed around the sensitive wires that
carried them. Each year that Shannon placed a call, he was less likely
to speak to a human operator and more likely to have his call placed
by machine, by one of the automated switchboards that Bell Labs
grandly called a “mechanical brain.” In the process of assembling and
refining these sprawling machines, Shannon’s generation of scientists
came to understand information in much the same way that an earlier
generation of scientists came to understand heat in the process of
building steam engines.
It was Shannon who made the final synthesis, who defined the
concept of information and effectively solved the problem of noise. It

was Shannon who was credited with gathering the threads into a new
science. But he had important predecessors at Bell Labs, two engineers
who had shaped his thinking since he discovered their work in Ann
Arbor, who were the first to consider how information might be put
on a scientific footing, and whom Shannon’s landmark paper singled
out as pioneers.

One was Harry Nyquist. When he was eighteen, his family left its
Swedish farm and joined the wave of Scandinavian immigration to the
upper Midwest; he worked construction in Sweden for four years to
pay for his share of the passage. Ten years after his arrival, he had a
doctorate in physics from Yale and a job as a scientist in the Bell
System. A Bell lifer, Nyquist was responsible for one of the first
prototype

fax

machines:

he

sketched

out

a

proposal

for

“telephotography” as early as 1918. By 1924 there was a working
model: a machine that scanned a photograph, represented the
brightness of each chunk with its own level of electrical current, and
sent those currents in pulses over the phone lines, where they were
retranslated into a photographic negative on the other end, ready for
the darkroom. Impressive as the display was, the market had little
appetite for it, especially with its seven minutes of transmission time
for a single small photo. But Nyquist’s thoughts on a less glamorous
technology, the telegraph, were published in the same year. Those
insights would prove far more lasting.

By the 1920s, telegraphy was an old technology; it had not been at
the leading edge of innovation for decades. The exciting hardware
developments were in telephone networks and even, as Nyquist
showed,

in

telephotography—applications

that

made

use

of

continuous signals, while the telegraph could only speak in dot and
dash. Yet the Bell System still operated a massive telegraph network,
and money and careers were still riding on the same problems with
which Thomson had grappled: how to send signals through that
network at a maximum of speed and a minimum of noise.
Engineers already understood, Nyquist recalled, that the electrical
signals carrying messages through networks—whether telegraph, phone, or -photo—fluctuated wildly up and down. Represented on
paper, the signals would look like waves: not calmly undulating sine
waves, but a chaotic, wind-lashed line seemingly driven without a
pattern. Yet there was a pattern. Even the most anarchic fluctuation
could be resolved into the sum of a multitude of calm, regular waves,
all crashing on top of one another at their own frequencies until they
frothed into chaos. (This was the same math, in fact, that revealed
tidal fluctuations to be the sum of many simple functions, and so
helped make possible the first analog computers.) In this way,
communications networks could carry a range, or a “band,” of
frequencies. And it seemed that a greater range of frequencies
imposed on top of one another, a greater “bandwidth,” was needed to
generate the more interesting and complex waves that could carry
richer information. To efficiently carry a phone conversation, the Bell

network needed frequencies ranging from about 200 to 3,200 hertz, or
a bandwidth of 3,000 hertz. Telegraphy required less; television would
require 2,000 times more.
Nyquist showed how the bandwidth of any communications
channel provided a cap on the amount of “intelligence” that could
pass through it at a given speed. But this limit on intelligence meant
that distinction between continuous signals (like the message on a
phone line) and discrete signals (like dots and dashes or, we might add,
0’s and 1’s) was much less clear-cut than it seemed. A continuous
signal still varied smoothly in amplitude, but you could also represent
that signal as a series of samples, or discrete time-slices—and within
the limit of a given bandwidth, no one would be able to tell the
difference. Practically, that result showed Bell Labs how to send
telegraph and telephone signals on the same line without interference
between the two. More fundamentally, as a professor of electrical
engineering

wrote,

it

showed

that

“the

world

of

technical

communications is essentially discrete or ‘digital.’ ”
Nyquist’s most important contribution to the idea of information
was buried in the middle of a 1924 paper read into the record of an
engineers’ technical conference in Philadelphia. It was only four short
paragraphs under the unpromising heading “Theoretical Possibilities
Using Codes with Different Numbers of Current Values.” Those four
paragraphs were, it turned out, a first crack at explaining the
relationship between the physical properties of a channel and the

speed with which it could transmit intelligence. It was a step beyond
Thomson: intelligence was not electricity.
So what was it? In Nyquist’s words, “by the speed of transmission
of intelligence is meant the number of characters, representing
different letters, figures, etc., which can be transmitted in a given
length of time.” This was much less clear than it might have been—
but for the first time, someone was groping toward a meaningful way
of treating messages scientifically. Here, then, is Nyquist’s formula for
the speed at which a telegraph can send intelligence:
W = k log m
W is the speed of intelligence. m is the number of “current values”
that the system can transmit. A current value is a discrete signal that
a telegraph system is equipped to send: the number of current values
is something like the number of possible letters in an alphabet. If the
system can only communicate “on” or “off,” it has two current values;
if it can communicate “negative current,” “off,” and “positive current,”
it has three; and if it can communicate “strong negative,” “negative,”
“off,” “positive,” and “strong positive,” it has five.I Finally, k is the
number of current values the system is able to send each second.
In other words, Nyquist showed that the speed at which a telegraph
could transmit intelligence depended on two factors: the speed at
which it could send signals, and the number of “letters” in its
vocabulary. The more “letters” or current values that were possible,
the fewer that would actually have to be sent over the wire. As an

extreme case, imagine that there were a single ideogram that
represented the entire content of this paragraph, and another single
ideogram that represented the entire content of the paragraph just
above; if that were the case, then we could convey the intelligence in
these paragraphs to you hundreds of times faster. That was Nyquist’s
surprising result: the larger the number of “letters” a telegraph system
could use, the faster it could send a message. Or we can look at it the
other way around. The larger the number of possible current values
we can choose from, the greater the density of intelligence in each
signal, or in each second of communication. In the same way, our
hypothetical ideogram could carry as much intelligence as all 1,262
characters in this paragraph—but only because it would have been
chosen from a dictionary of millions and millions of ideograms, each
somehow representing an entire paragraph of its own.II
Nyquist’s short digression on current values offered the first hint
of a connection between intelligence and choice. But it remained just
that. Nyquist was more interested in engineering more efficient
systems than in speculating about the nature of this intelligence; and,
more to the point, he was still expected to produce some measure of
practical results. So, after recommending to his colleagues that they
build more current values into their telegraph networks, he turned to
other work. Nor, after leaving the tantalizing suggestion that all
systems of communication resembled the telegraph in their digital
nature, did he go on to generalize about communication itself. At the
same time, his way of defining intelligence—“different letters, figures,

etc.”—remained distressingly vague. Behind the letters and figures
there was—what, exactly?

From Intelligence to information: such a change in names tells us
little about the math that underlies them. But in this case, the
renaming is a useful marker. It is a border—arbitrary, in the way that
very many borders are—between the adolescence and the maturity of
a new science.
Reading the work of Ralph Hartley, Shannon said, was “an
important influence on my life.” Not simply on his research or his
studies: Shannon spent much of his life working with the conceptual
tools that Hartley built, and for the better part of his life, much of his
public identity—“Claude Shannon, Father of Information Theory”—
was bound up in having been the one who extended Hartley’s ideas far
beyond what Hartley, or anyone, could have imagined. Aside from
George Boole, that obscure logician, no one shaped Shannon’s thought
more. In the 1939 letter in which Shannon first laid out the study of
communications that he would complete nine years later, he used
Nyquist’s “intelligence.” By the time the work was finished, he used
Hartley’s crisper term: “information.” While an engineer like Shannon
would not have needed the reminder, it was Hartley who made
meaning’s irrelevance to information clearer than ever.
After his graduation from Oxford as one of the first Rhodes
scholars, Hartley was put to work on yet another effort to bridge the
Atlantic. He led the Bell System team designing receivers for the first

transatlantic voice call, one sent over radio waves, not wires. This
time, the hindrance was not physical, but political. By the time the
test was ready, in 1915, Europe was at war. The Bell engineers had to
beg the French authorities for the use of the continent’s highest radio
antenna, which doubled as a key military asset. In the end, the
Americans were allowed just minutes of precious time atop that
antenna, the Eiffel Tower, but they were enough: Hartley’s receivers
were a success, and a human voice sent from Virginia was heard at the
top of the tower.
From the beginning, Hartley’s interests in communications
networks were more promiscuous than Nyquist’s: he was in search of
a

single

framework

that

could

encompass

the

information-

transmitting power of any medium—a way of comparing telegraph to
radio to television on a common scale. And Hartley’s 1927 paper,
which brought Nyquist’s work to a higher level of abstraction, came
closer to the goal than anyone yet. Suiting that abstraction, the paper
Hartley presented to a scientific conference at Lake Como, in Italy,
was simply called “Transmission of Information.”
It was an august crowd that had assembled at the foot of the Alps
for the conference. In attendance were Niels Bohr and Werner
Heisenberg, two founders of quantum physics, and Enrico Fermi, who
would go on to build the world’s first nuclear reactor, under the
bleacher seats at the University of Chicago’s stadium—and Hartley
was at pains to show that the study of information belonged in their
company. He began by asking his audience to consider a thought

experiment. Imagine a telegraph system with three current values:
negative, off, and positive. Instead of allowing a trained operator to
select the values with his telegraph key, we hook the key up to a
random device, say, “a ball rolling into one of three pockets.” We roll
the ball down the ramp, send a random signal, and repeat as many
times as we’d like. We’ve sent a message. Is it meaningful?
It depends, Hartley answered, on what we mean by meaning. If the
wire was sound and the signal undistorted, we’ve sent a clear and
readable set of symbols to our receiver—much clearer, in fact, than a
human-generated message over a faulty wire. But however clearly it
comes through, the message is also probably gibberish: “The reason
for this is that only a limited number of the possible sequences have
been assigned meanings,” and a random choice of sequence is far
more likely to be outside that limited range. We’ve arbitrarily agreed
that the sequence dot dot dot dot, dot, dot dash dot dot, dot dash dot
dot, dash dash dash carries meaning, while the sequence dot dot dot
dot, dot, dot dash dash dot, dot dash dot dot, dash dash dash carries
nonsense.III There’s only meaning where there’s prior agreement
about our symbols. And all communication is like this, from waves
sent over electrical wires, to the letters agreed upon to symbolize
words, to the words agreed upon to symbolize things.
For Hartley, these agreements on the meaning of symbol
vocabularies all depend on “psychological factors”—and those were
two dirty words. Some symbols were relatively fixed (Morse code, for
instance), but the meaning of many others varied with language,

personality, mood, tone of voice, time of day, and so much more.
There was no precision there. If, following Nyquist, the quantity of
information had something to do with choice from a number of
symbols, then the first requirement was getting to clarity on the
number of symbols, free from the whims of psychology. A science of
information would have to make sense of the messages we call
gibberish, as well as the messages we call meaningful. So in a crucial
passage, Hartley explained how we might begin to think about
information not psychologically, but physically: “In estimating the
capacity of the physical system to transmit information we should
ignore the question of interpretation, make each selection perfectly
arbitrary, and base our results on the possibility of the receiver’s
distinguishing the result of selecting any one symbol from that of
selecting any other.”
In this, Hartley formalized an intuition already wired into the
phone company—which was, after all, in the business of transmission,
not interpretation. As in the thought experiment of a telegraph
controlled by a rolling ball, the only requirements are that the
symbols make it through the channel, and that someone at the other
end can tell them apart.
The real measure of information is not in the symbols we send—it’s
in the symbols we could have sent, but did not. To send a message is to
make a selection from a pool of possible symbols, and “at each
selection there are eliminated all of the other symbols which might
have been chosen.” To choose is to kill off alternatives. We see this

most clearly, Hartley observed, in the cases in which messages happen
to bear meaning. “For example, in the sentence, ‘Apples are red,’ the
first word eliminated other kinds of fruit and all other objects in
general. The second directs attention to some property or condition of
apples, and the third eliminates other possible colors.” This rolling
process of elimination holds true for any message. The information
value of a symbol depends on the number of alternatives that were
killed off in its choosing. Symbols from large vocabularies bear more
information than symbols from small ones. Information measures
freedom of choice.
In this way, Hartley’s thoughts on choice were a strong echo of
Nyquist’s insight into current values. But what Nyquist demonstrated
for telegraphy, Hartley proved true for any form of communication;
Nyquist’s ideas turned out to be a subset of Hartley’s. In the bigger
picture, for those discrete messages in which symbols are sent one at
a time, only three variables controlled the quantity of information:
the number k of symbols sent per second, the size s of the set of
possible symbols, and the length n of the message. Given these
quantities, and calling the amount of information transmitted H, we
have:
H = k log sn
If we make random choices from a set of symbols, the number of
possible messages increases exponentially as the length of our
message grows. For instance, in our 26-letter alphabet there are 676

possible two-letter strings (or 262), but 17,576 three-letter strings (or
263). Hartley, like Nyquist before him, found this inconvenient. A
measure of information would be more workable if it increased
linearly with

each

additional

symbol,

rather

than

exploding

exponentially. In this way, a 20-letter telegram could be said to hold
twice as much information as a 10-letter telegram, provided that both
messages used the same alphabet. That explains what the logarithm is
doing in Hartley’s formula (and Nyquist’s): it’s converting an
exponential change into a linear one. For Hartley, this was a matter of
“practical engineering value.”IV
Engineering value was indeed what he was after, despite efforts to
pin down information that sounded more like those of a philosopher
or a linguist. What is the nature of communication? What happens
when we send a message? Is there information in a message you can’t
even understand? These were powerful questions in their own right.
But in all the generations of human communication, those questions
were posed with urgency and rigor just then because the answers had
suddenly grown exceptionally valuable. In the profusion of undersea
cables, transcontinental radio calls, pictures sent by phone line, and
moving images passing through the air, our sudden skill at
communicating had outstripped our knowledge of communication
itself. And whether in disaster—a fried cable—or merely an
inconvenience—the flicker and blur of the first televisions—that
ignorance exacted its toll.

Hartley came the nearest thus far to the essence of information.
More than that, his work reflected the dawning awareness that clarity
about information was already extending engineers’ powers. For
instance, they could chop up continuous signals, such as the human
voice, into digital samples—and with that done, the information
content of any message, continuous or discrete, could be held to a
single standard. How much information, for instance, is in a picture?
We can think of a picture just as we think of a telegraph. In the same
way we can break a telegraph into a discrete string of dots and dashes,
we can break a picture into a discrete number of squares that Hartley
called “elementary areas”: what were later termed picture elements, or
pixels. Just as telegraph operators choose from a finite set of symbols,
each elementary area is defined by a choice from a finite number of
intensities. The larger the set of intensities, and the larger the number
of elementary areas, the more information the picture holds. That
explains why color images hold more information than images in
black and white—the choice made in each pixel comes from a larger
vocabulary of symbols.
Squares and intensities: the image might be the Last Supper or a
dog’s breakfast, but information is indifferent. In this notion that
even a picture can be quantified, there’s an insight into information’s
radically utilitarian premises, its almost Faustian exchange. But when
we accept those premises, we have the first inklings of a unity behind
every message.

And if some humans can achieve indifference to meaning only with
great, practically ascetic effort, our machines are wired for this
indifference: they have it effortlessly. So a common measure of
information might allow us to express the limits of our machines and
the content of our human messages in the same equations—how to
shape machines and messages to a common fit. A measure for
information, for example, helps us uncover the connections between
the bandwidth of a medium, and the information in the message, and
the time devoted to sending it. As Hartley showed, there is always a
trade-off between these three quantities. To send a message faster, we
can pay for more bandwidth or simplify the message. If we save on
bandwidth, we pay the price in less information or a longer
transmission time. This explained why, in the 1920s, sending an image
over phone lines took so impractically long: phone lines lacked the
bandwidth for something so complicated. Treating information,
bandwidth, and time as three precise, swappable quantities could
show which ideas for sending messages were “within the realm of
physical possibility”—and which shouldn’t even be attempted.
Last, clarity about information might lead to clarity about noise.
Noise might be something more precise than the crackle of static or a
series of electric pulses lost somewhere under the Atlantic; noise
might be measurable, too. Hartley ventured only part of the way
toward this goal, but he shed light on a specific kind of distortion he
called “intersymbol interference.” If the main criterion for a valid
message was that the receiver tells the symbols apart, then an

especially worrisome kind of inaccuracy was the type that causes
symbols to blur into unreadability, as in the overlap of telegraph
pulses sent by an overeager operator. With a measurement of
information, we might calculate not only the time required to send
any message over a given bandwidth, but the number of symbols we
can send each second before they arrive too quickly to be
distinguished.
This, then, was roughly where information sat when Claude
Shannon picked up the thread. What began in the nineteenth century
as an awareness that we might speak to one another more accurately
at a distance if we could somehow quantify our messages had—almost
—ripened into a new science. Each step was a step into higher
abstraction. Information was the electric flow through a wire.
Information was a number of characters sent by a telegraph.
Information was choice among symbols. At each iteration, the
concrete was falling away.
As Shannon chewed all of this over for a decade in his bachelor’s
apartment in the West Village or behind his closed door at Bell Labs, it
seemed as if the science of information had nearly ground to a halt.
Hartley himself was still on the job at Bell Labs, a scientist nearing
retirement when Shannon signed on, but too far out of the
mainstream for the two to collaborate effectively. The Hartley whom
Shannon finally met in person seemed far removed from the Hartley
who had captivated him in school. Shannon remembered him as

very bright in some ways, but in some ways he got hung up on
things. He was kind of hung up on a theory that Einstein was
wrong. That Newtonian classical physics could be rescued, you
see. And he was spending all his time trying to explain all the
things that relativity explained by changing the picture, just as
people did . . . back in the 1920s or so, but the scientific
community had finally come around to realizing that Einstein
was right. All the scientific community except Hartley I guess.
So from Hartley to Shannon, said Bell Labs’ John Pierce, the science
of information “appears to have taken a prolonged and comfortable
rest.” Blame Hartley’s relativity fixation, perhaps. Or blame the war—a
war that unleashed tremendous applications in plane-tracking robot
bombs and digital telephony, in code making and codebreaking and
computing, but a war that saw few scientists with the time or
incentive to step back and ask what had been learned about
communication in general. Or simply blame the fact that the next and
decisive step after Hartley could only be found with genius and time.
We can say, from our hindsight, that if the step were obvious, it surely
wouldn’t have stayed untaken for twenty years. If the step were
obvious, it surely wouldn’t have been met with such astonishment.
“It came as a bomb,” said Pierce.

I. Even with three, five, or more current values, such a system is still digital: it still uses discrete steps from
one value to another (as on a digital clock), rather than a continuous sweep (as on an analog clock). Digital
systems are very often binary (they have only two values, as in Shannon’s discussion of switching circuits),
but they don’t have to be.

II. Of course, the impossibility of maintaining and memorizing such a dictionary points to the price of
wildly accumulating symbols or current values. What an alphabetic language loses in density and efficiency,
it can gain in ease of comprehension. In the same way, there is a point at which the cost of building more
current values into a telegraph system outweighs the savings of faster messaging.
III. Decoded from Morse code, the first sequence reads as “hello,” the second as “heplo.” Still, the receiver
might recognize “heplo” as a typo or transmission error thanks to the redundancy of our language—an idea
that would prove highly useful to Shannon.
IV. It’s entirely fair to design a new measurement with human needs in mind, as long as the measurement is
internally consistent. By comparison, there’s no natural reason why a single degree Celsius should cover a
wider range of temperature than a single degree Fahrenheit—it’s just that many people find it convenient to
think of water’s freezing point as 0° and its boiling point as 100° and define the degrees in between
accordingly. Choosing whether to think of information as a quantity that increases exponentially or linearly
with message length is a matter of human convenience in the same way, which is why Shannon would
describe the logarithmic scale for information as “nearer to our intuitive feelings as to the proper measure.”

16
The Bomb
The fundamental problem of communication is that of reproducing
at one point either exactly or approximately a message selected at
another point. Frequently the messages have meaning. . . . These
semantic aspects of communication are irrelevant to the engineering
problem.”
From the start, “A Mathematical Theory of Communication”
demonstrated that Shannon had digested what was most incisive from
the pioneers of information science. Where Nyquist used the vague
concept of “intelligence” and Hartley struggled to explain the value of
discarding the psychological and semantic, Shannon took it for
granted that meaning could be ignored. In the same way, he readily
accepted that information measures freedom of choice: what makes
messages interesting is that they are “selected from a set of possible
messages.” It would satisfy our intuitions, he agreed, if we stipulated
that the amount of information on two punch cards doubled (rather

than squared) the amount of information on one, or that two
electronic channels could carry twice the information of one.
That was Shannon’s debt. What he did next demonstrated his
ambition. Every system of communication—not just the ones existing
in 1948, not just the ones made by human hands, but every system
conceivable—could be reduced to a radically simple essence.

• The information source produces a message.
• The transmitter encodes the message into a form capable of being
sent as a signal.
• The channel is the medium through which the signal passes.
• The noise source represents the distortions and corruptions that
afflict the signal on its way to the receiver.
• The receiver decodes the message, reversing the action of the
transmitter.
• The destination is the recipient of the message.

The beauty of this stripped-down model is that it applies
universally. It is a story that messages cannot help but play out—
human messages, messages in circuits, messages in the neurons,
messages in the blood. You speak into a phone (source); the phone
encodes the sound pressure of your voice into an electrical signal
(transmitter); the signal passes into a wire (channel); a signal in a
nearby wire interferes with it (noise); the signal is decoded back into
sound (receiver); the sound reaches the ear at the other end
(destination).
In one of your cells, a strand of your DNA contains the instructions
to build a protein (source); the instructions are encoded in a strand of
messenger RNA (transmitter); the messenger RNA carries the code to
your cell’s sites of protein synthesis (channel); one of the “letters” in
the RNA code is randomly switched in a “point mutation” (noise); each
three-“letter” code is translated into an amino acid, protein’s building
block (receiver); the amino acids are bound into a protein chain, and
the DNA’s instructions have been carried out (destination).
It is wartime. Allied headquarters plans an assault on the enemy
beaches (source); staff officers turn the plan into a written order
(transmitter); copies of the order are sent to the front lines, by radio or
courier or carrier pigeon (channel); headquarters has deliberately
scrambled the message, encrypting it to look as random as possible (a
kind of artificial “noise”); one copy reaches the Allies on the front
lines, who remove the encryption with the help of a key and translate
it into a battle plan, but another copy is intercepted by the enemy,

whose cryptanalysts crack the code for themselves (receiver); the
order issued at headquarters, and intercepted by the enemy, has
turned into a strategy and counterstrategy for the battle to come
(destination).
Those six boxes are flexible enough to apply even to the messages
the world had not yet conceived of—messages for which Shannon
was, here, preparing the way. They encompass human voices as
electromagnetic waves that bounce off satellites and the ceaseless
digital churn of the Internet. They pertain just as well to the codes
written into DNA. Although the molecule’s discovery was still five
years in the future, Shannon was arguably the first to conceive of our
genes as information bearers, an imaginative leap that erased the
border between mechanical, electronic, and biological messages.
Breaking down the act of communication into these universal steps
enabled Shannon to home in on each step in isolation—to consider in
turn what we do when we select our messages at the source, or how
the struggle against noise can be fought and won in the channel.
Imagining the transmitter as a distinct conceptual box proved to be
especially pivotal: as we will see, the work of encoding messages for
transmission turned out to hold the key to Shannon’s most
revolutionary result. When we remember that Shannon’s mind was
often at its best in the presence of outrageous analogies (as, earlier,
between Boole’s logic and a box of switches), we can observe how this
universal structure might serve as a tool for bringing promising
analogies to light.

First, though, Shannon saw that information science had still
failed to pin down something crucial about information: its
probabilistic nature. When Nyquist and Hartley defined it as a choice
from a set of symbols, they assumed that each choice from the set
would be equally probable, and would be independent of all the
symbols chosen previously. It’s true, Shannon countered, that some
choices are like this. But only some. We could start, he later explained,
by asking “what would be the simplest source you might have, or the
simplest thing you were trying to send. And I’d think of tossing a
coin.” A fair coin has a 50-50 chance of landing heads or tails. This
simplest choice possible—heads or tails, yes or no, 1 or 0—is the most
basic message that can exist. It is the kind of message that actually
conforms to Hartley’s way of thinking. It would be the baseline for the
true measure of information.
New sciences demand new units of measurement—as if to prove
that the concepts they have been talking and talking around have at
last been captured by number. The new unit of Shannon’s science was
to represent this basic situation of choice. Because it was a choice of 0
or 1, it was a “binary digit.” In one of the only pieces of collaboration
Shannon allowed on the entire project, he put it to a lunchroom table
of his Bell Labs colleagues to come up with a snappier name. Binit and
bigit were weighed and rejected, but the winning proposal was laid
down by John Tukey, a Princeton professor working at Bell. Bit.
One bit is the amount of information that results from a choice
between two equally likely options. So “a device with two stable

positions . . . can store one bit of information.” The bit-ness of such a
device—a switch with two positions, a coin with two sides, a digit with
two states—lies not in the outcome of the choice, but in the number
of possible choices and the odds of the choosing. Two such devices
would represent four total choices and would be said to store two bits.
Because Shannon’s measure was logarithmic (to base 2—in other
words, the “reverse” of raising 2 to the power of a given number), the
number of bits doubled each time the number of choices offered was
squared:
Bits

Choices

1

2

2

4

4

16

8

256

16

65,536

Some choices are like this. But not all coins are fair. Not all options
are equally likely. Not all messages are equally probable.
So think of the example at the opposite extreme: Think of a coin
with two heads. Toss it as many times as you like—does it give you
any information? Shannon insisted that it does not. It tells you
nothing that you do not already know: it resolves no uncertainty.
What does information really measure? It measures the uncertainty
we overcome. It measures our chances of learning something we
haven’t yet learned. Or, more specifically: when one thing carries
information about another—just as a meter reading tells us about a

physical quantity, or a book tells us about a life—the amount of
information it carries reflects the reduction in uncertainty about the
object. The messages that resolve the greatest amount of uncertainty
—that are picked from the widest range of symbols with the fairest
odds—are the richest in information. But where there is perfect
certainty, there is no information: there is nothing to be said.
“Do you swear to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth?” How many times in the history of courtroom oaths has the
answer been anything other than “Yes”? Because only one answer is
really conceivable, the answer provides us with almost no new
information—we could have guessed it beforehand. That’s true of
most human rituals, of all the occasions when our speech is
prescribed and securely expected (“Do you take this man . . . ?”). And
when we separate meaning from information, we find that some of
our most meaningful utterances are also our least informative.
We might be tempted to fixate on the tiny number of instances in
which the oath is denied or the bride is left at the altar. But in
Shannon’s terms, the amount of information at stake lies not in one
particular choice, but in the probability of learning something new
with any given choice. A coin heavily weighted for heads will still
occasionally come up tails—but because the coin is so predictable on
average, it’s also information-poor.
Still, the most interesting cases lie between the two extremes of
utter uncertainty and utter predictability: in the broad realm of
weighted coins. Nearly every message sent and received in the real

world is a weighted coin, and the amount of information at stake
varies with the weighting. Here, Shannon showed the amount of
information at stake in a coin flip in which the probability of a given
side (call it p) varies from 0 percent to 50 percent to 100 percent:

The case of 50-50 odds offers a maximum of one bit, but the
amount of surprise falls off steadily as the choice grows more
predictable in either direction, until we reach the perfectly

predictable choice that tells us nothing. The special 50-50 case was
still described by Hartley’s law. But now it was clear that Hartley’s
theory was consumed by Shannon’s: Shannon’s worked for every set
of odds. In the end, the real measure of information depended on
those odds:
H = -p log p – q log q
Here, p and q are the probabilities of the two outcomes—of either
face of the coin, or of either symbol that can be sent—which together
add up to 100 percent. (When more than two symbols are possible, we
can insert more probabilities into the equation.) The number of bits in
a message (H) hangs on its uncertainty: the closer the odds are to
equal, the more uncertain we are at the outset, and the more the
result surprises us. And as we fall away from equality, the amount of
uncertainty to be resolved falls with it. So think of H as a measure of
the coin’s “average surprise.” Run the numbers for a coin weighted to
come up heads 70 percent of the time and you find that flipping it
conveys a message worth just about .9 bits.
Now, the goal of all this was not merely to grind out the precise
number of bits in every conceivable message: in situations more
complicated than a coin flip, the possibilities multiply and the precise
odds of each become much harder to pin down. Shannon’s point was
to force his colleagues to think about information in terms of
probability and uncertainty. It was a break with the tradition of
Nyquist and Hartley that helped to set the rest of Shannon’s project

in motion—though, true to form, he dismissed it as trivial: “I don’t
regard it as so difficult.”
Difficult or not, it was new, and it revealed new possibilities for
transmitting information and conquering noise. We can turn unfair
odds to our favor.

For the vast bulk of messages, in fact, symbols do not behave like
fair coins. The symbol that is sent now depends, in important and
predictable ways, on the symbol that was just sent: one symbol has a
“pull” on the next. Take an image: Hartley showed how to measure its
information content by gauging the intensity of each “elementary
area.” But in images that resemble anything other than TV static,
intensities are not splattered randomly across the pixels: each pixel
has pull. A light pixel is more likely to appear next to a light pixel, a
dark next to a dark. Or, suggested Shannon, think of the simplest case
of telegraph messages. (By now it was common to appeal to the
telegraph as the most basic model of discrete communication, fit for
simplification and study; even as the telegraph grew obsolete, it
continued to live a productive afterlife in information theory papers.)
Reduce the alphabet to three basic Morse characters of dot, dash, and
space. Whatever the message, a dot can be followed by a dot, dash, or
space; a dash can be followed by a dot, dash, or space—but a space can
only be followed by a dot or dash. A space is never supposed to be
followed by another space. The choice of symbols is not perfectly
free. True, a random machine in charge of a telegraph key might break

the rules and ignorantly send a space after a space—but nearly all the
messages that interest engineers do come with implicit rules, are
something less than free, and Shannon taught engineers how to take
huge advantage of this fact.
This was the hunch that Shannon had suggested to Hermann Weyl
in Princeton in 1939, and which he had spent almost a decade
building into theory: Information is stochastic. It is neither fully
unpredictable nor fully determined. It unspools in roughly guessable
ways. That’s why the classic model of a stochastic process is a drunk
man stumbling down the street. He doesn’t walk in the respectably
straight line that would allow us to predict his course perfectly. Each
lurch looks like a crapshoot. But watch him for long enough and we’ll
see patterns start to emerge from his stumble, patterns that we could
work out statistically if we cared to. Over time, we’ll develop a decent
estimation of the spots on the pavement on which he’s most likely to
end up; our estimates are even more likely to hold if we begin with
some assumptions about the general walking behavior of drunks. For
instance, they tend to gravitate toward lampposts.
Remarkably, as Shannon showed, this model also describes the
behavior of messages and languages. Whenever we communicate,
rules everywhere restrict our freedom to choose the next letter and
the next pineapple.I Because these rules render certain patterns more
likely and certain patterns almost impossible, languages like English
come well short of complete uncertainty and maximal information:
the sequence “th” has already occurred 6,431 times in this book, the

sequence “tk” just this once. From the perspective of the information
theorist, our languages are hugely predictable—almost boring.
To prove it, Shannon set up an ingenious, if informal, experiment in
garbled text: he showed how, by playing with stochastic processes, we
can construct something resembling the English language from
scratch. Shannon began with complete randomness. He opened a
book of random numbers, put his finger on one of the entries, and
wrote down the corresponding character from a 27-symbol “alphabet”
(26 letters, plus a space). He called it “zero-order approximation.”
Here’s what happened:
XFOML RXKHRJFFJUJ ZLPWCFWKCYJ FFJEYVKCQSGHYD QPAAMKBZAACIBZLHJQD.

There are equal odds for each character, and no character exerts a
“pull” on any other. This is the printed equivalent of static. This is
what our language would look like if it were perfectly uncertain and
thus perfectly informative.
But we do have some certainty about English. For one, we know
that some letters are likelier than others. A century before Shannon,
Samuel Morse (inspired by some experimental rifling through a
typesetter’s box of iron characters) had built his hunches about letter
frequency into his telegraph code, assigning “E” an easy single dot and
“Q” a more cumbersome dash-dash-dot-dash. Morse got it roughly
right: by Shannon’s time, it was known that about 12 percent of
English text is the letter “E,” and just 1 percent the letter “Q.” With a
table of letter frequencies in one hand and his book of random

numbers in the other, Shannon restacked the odds for each character.
This is “first-order approximation”:
OCRO HLI RGWR NMIELWIS EU LL NBNESEBYA TH EEI ALHENHTTPA OOBTTVA
NAH BRL.

More than that, though, we know that our freedom to insert any
letter into a line of English text is also constrained by the character
that’s just come before. “K” is common after “C,” but almost
impossible after “T.” A “Q” demands a “U.” Shannon had tables of
these two-letter “digram” frequencies, but rather than repeat the
cumbersome process, he took a cruder tack, confident that his point
was still made. To construct a text with reasonable digram
frequencies, “one opens a book at random and selects a letter at
random on the page. This letter is recorded. The book is then opened
to another page and one reads until this letter is encountered. The
succeeding letter is then recorded. Turning to another page this
second letter is searched for and the succeeding letter is recorded,
etc.” If all goes well, the text that results reflects the odds with which
one character follows another in English. This is “second-order
approximation”:
ON IE ANTSOUTINYS ARE T INCTORE ST BE S DEAMY ACHIN D ILONASIVE
TUCOOWE AT TEASONARE FUSO TIZIN ANDY TOBE SEACE CTISBE.

Out of nothing, a stochastic process has blindly created five English
words (six, if we charitably supply an apostrophe and count ACHIN’).

“Third-order approximation,” using the same method to search for
trigrams, brings us even closer to passable English:
IN NO IST LAT WHEY CRATICT FROURE BIRS GROCID PONDENOME OF
DEMONSTURES OF THE REPTAGIN IS REGOACTIONA OF CRE.

Not only are two- and three-letter combinations of letters more
likely to occur together, but so are entire strings of letters—in other
words, words. Here is “first-order word approximation,” using the
frequencies of whole words:
REPRESENTING AND SPEEDILY IS AN GOOD APT OR COME CAN DIFFERENT
NATURAL HERE HE THE A IN CAME THE TO OF TO EXPERT GRAY COME TO
FURNISHES THE LINE MESSAGE HAD BE THESE.

Even further, our choice of the next word is strongly governed by
the word that has just gone before. Finally, then, Shannon turned to
“second-order word approximation,” choosing a random word, flipping
forward in his book until he found another instance, and then
recording the word that appeared next:
THE HEAD AND IN FRONTAL ATTACK ON AN ENGLISH WRITER THAT THE
CHARACTER OF THIS POINT IS THEREFORE ANOTHER METHOD FOR THE LETTERS
THAT THE TIME OF WHO EVER TOLD THE PROBLEM FOR AN UNEXPECTED.

“The particular sequence of ten words ‘attack on an English writer
that the character of this’ is not at all unreasonable,” Shannon
observed with pride.II
From gibberish to reasonable, the passages grew closer and closer
to passable text. They were not written, but generated: the only

human intervention came in manipulating the rules. How, Shannon
asked, do we get to English? We do it by making our rules more
restrictive. We do it by making ourselves more predictable. We do it
by becoming less informative. And these stochastic processes are just
a model of the unthinking choices we make whenever we speak a
sentence, whenever we send any message at all.
It turns out that some of the most childish questions about the
world—“Why don’t apples fall upwards?”—are also the most
scientifically productive. If there is a pantheon of such absurd and
revealing questions, it ought to include a space for Shannon’s: “Why
doesn’t anyone say XFOML RXKHRJFFJUJ?” Investigating that
question made clear that our “freedom of speech” is mostly an
illusion: it comes from an impoverished understanding of freedom.
Freer communicators than us—free, of course, in the sense of
uncertainty and information—would say XFOML RXKHRJFFJUJ. But
in reality, the vast bulk of possible messages have already been
eliminated for us before we utter a word or write a line. Or, to alter
just slightly one of the fortuitous sequences that emerged by chance
on Shannon’s notepad: THE LINE MESSAGE HAD [TO] BE THESE.

Still, who cares about letter frequencies?
For one, cryptanalysts do—and Shannon was one of the best. He
was familiar with the charts of letter and digram and trigram
frequencies because they were the codebreaker’s essential tool kit. In
nearly any code, certain symbols will predominate, and these symbols

are likely to stand for the most common characters. Recall how, in
Shannon’s favorite childhood story, “The Gold-Bug,” the eccentric Mr.
Legrand uncovered a buried treasure by cracking this seemingly
impenetrable block of code:
53‡‡†305))6*;4826)4‡.)4‡);806*;48†8’60))85;]8*:‡*8†83
(88)5*†;46(;88*96*?;8)*‡(;485);5*†2:*‡(;4956*2(5*-4)8’8*;
4069285);)6†8)4‡‡;1(‡9;48081;8:8‡1;48†85;4)485†528806*81
(‡9;48;(88;4(‡?34;48)4‡;161;:188;‡?;
He began, as all good codebreakers did, by counting frequencies.
The symbol “8” occurred more than any other, 33 times. This small
fact was the crack that brought the entire structure down. Here, in
words that captivated Shannon as a boy, is how Mr. Legrand explained
it:
Now, in English, the letter which most frequently occurs is e . . .
An individual sentence of any length is rarely seen, in which it is
not the prevailing character. . . .
As our predominant character is 8, we will commence by
assuming it as the e of the natural alphabet. . . .
Now, of all words in the language, “the” is the most usual; let
us see, therefore, whether they are not repetitions of any three
characters in the same order of collocation, the last of them
being 8. If we discover repetitions of such letters, so arranged,
they will most probably represent the word “the.” On inspection,
we find no less than seven such arrangements, the characters

being ;48. We may, therefore, assume that the semicolon
represents t, that 4 represents h, and that 8 represents e—the
last being now well confirmed. Thus a great step has been taken.
Being the work of a semiliterate pirate, the code was easy enough to
break. More sophisticated ciphers would employ any number of
stratagems to foil frequency counts: switching code alphabets
partway through a message, eliminating double vowels and double
consonants, simply doing without the letter “e.” The codes that
Shannon tested for Roosevelt and that Turing cracked for Churchill
were more convoluted still. But in the end, codebreaking remained
possible, and remains so, because every message runs up against a
basic

reality

of

human

communication.

It

always

involves

redundancy; to communicate is to make oneself predictable.
This was the age-old codebreaker’s intuition that Shannon
formalized in his work on information theory: codebreaking works
because our messages are less, much less, than fully uncertain. To be
sure, it was not that Shannon’s work in cryptography drove his
breakthrough in information theory: he began thinking about
information years before he began thinking about codes in any formal
sense—before, in fact, he knew that he’d be spending several years as
a cryptographer in the service of the American government. At the
same time, his work on information and his work on codes grew from
a single source: his interest in the unexamined statistical nature of
messages, and his intuition that a mastery of this nature might extend
our powers of communication. He would explain later, “I wrote [the

information theory paper], which in a sense sort of justified some of
the time I’d been putting into [cryptography], at least in my mind. . . .
But there was this close connection. I mean they are very similar
things. . . . Information, at one time trying to conceal it, and at the
other time trying to transmit it.”
In Shannon’s terms, the feature of messages that makes codecracking possible is redundancy. A historian of cryptography, David
Kahn, explained it like this: “Roughly, redundancy means that more
symbols are transmitted in a message than are actually needed to bear
the information.” Information resolves our uncertainty; redundancy is
every part of a message that tells us nothing new. Whenever we can
guess what comes next, we’re in the presence of redundancy. Letters
can be redundant: because Q is followed almost automatically by U,
the U tells us almost nothing in its own right. We can usually discard
it, and many more letters besides. As Shannon put it, “MST PPL HV
LTTL DFFCLTY N RDNG THS SNTNC.”
Words can be redundant: “the” is almost always a grammatical
formality, and it can usually be erased with little cost to our
understanding. Poe’s cryptographic pirate would have been wise to
slash the redundancy of his message by cutting every instance of
“the,” or “;48”—it was the very opening that Mr. Legrand exploited to
such effect. Entire messages can be redundant: in all of those
weighted-coin cases in which our answers are all but known in
advance, we can speak and speak and say nothing new. On Shannon’s
understanding of information, the redundant symbols are all of the

ones we can do without—every letter, word, or line that we can strike
with no damage to the information.
As his approximations of text grew more and more like English,
then, they also grew more and more redundant. And if this
redundancy grows out of the rules that check our freedom, it is also
dictated by the practicalities of communicating with one another.
Every human language is highly redundant. From the dispassionate
perspective of the information theorist, the majority of what we say—
whether out of convention, or grammar, or habit—could just as well
go unsaid. In his theory of communication, Shannon guessed that the
world’s wealth of English text could be cut in half with no loss of
information: “When we write English, half of what we write is
determined by the structure of the language and half is chosen
freely.” Later on, his estimate of redundancy rose as high as 80
percent: only one in five characters actually bear information.
As it is, Shannon suggested, we’re lucky that our redundancy isn’t
any higher. If it were, there wouldn’t be any crossword puzzles. At zero
redundancy, in a world in which RXKHRJFFJUJ is a word, “any
sequence of letters is a reasonable text in the language and any two
dimensional array of letters forms a crossword puzzle.” At higher
redundancies, fewer sequences are possible, and the number of
potential intersections shrinks: if English were much more redundant,
it would be nearly impossible to make puzzles. On the other hand, if
English were a bit less redundant, Shannon speculated, we’d be filling
in crossword puzzles in three dimensions.

Shannon’s estimates of our language’s redundancy grew, he wrote
cryptically, out of “certain known results in cryptography.” The hint
he dropped there is a reminder that his great work on code writing,
“Communication Theory of Secrecy Systems,” was still classified in
1948. Other sources, though, Shannon could discuss more openly.
One was Raymond Chandler.
One evening, Shannon picked up Chandler’s pulpy book of
detective stories, Pickup on Noon Street, and flipped, as he often did in
those days, to a random passage. His job was to spell the text out
letter by letter; the job of his assistant was to guess the next letter
until she got it right. By the time they arrived at “A S-M-A-L-L O-B-LO-N-G R-E-A-D-I-N-G L-A-M-P O-N T-H-E D” she could guess the next
three letters with perfect accuracy. E-S-K.
The point was not the assistant’s powers of prediction—it was that
any English reader would be just as clairvoyant in the same position,
reading the same sentence governed by the same silent rules. By the
time the reader has reached D, she has already gotten the point. E-S-K
is a formality; and if the rules of our language left us free to shut up
once the point has been gotten, D would be enough. The redundancy
went even further. A phrase beginning “a small oblong reading lamp
on the” is almost certainly followed by one of two letters: D, or the
first guess, T. In a zero-redundancy language, the assistant would have
had just a 1-in-26 chance of guessing what came next, and so the next
letter would have been as informative as possible. In our language,
though, her odds were much closer to 1-in-2, and the letter bore far

less information. And even further: the Oxford English Dictionary lists
228,132 words. Out of that twenty-volume trove of lexicography, two
words were hugely probable after the short phrase that Shannon
spelled out: “desk”; “table.” Once Raymond Chandler got to “the,” he
had written himself into a corner. Not that he bore any fault for it: we
all write and talk and sing ourselves into corners as a condition of
writing and talking and singing.

Understanding redundancy, we can manipulate it deliberately,
just as an earlier era’s engineers learned to play tricks with steam and
heat.
Of course, humans had been experimenting with redundancy in
their trial-and-error way for centuries. We cut redundancy when we
write shorthand, when we assign nicknames, when we invent jargon to
compress a mass of meaning (“the left-hand side of the boat when
you’re facing the front”) into a single point (“port”). We add
redundancy when we say “V as in Victor” to make ourselves more
clearly heard, when we circumlocute around the obvious, even when
we repeat ourselves. But it was Shannon who showed the conceptual
unity behind all of these actions and more.
At the foundation of our Information Age—once wires and
microchips have been stripped away, once the stream of 0’s and 1’s
has been parted—we find Shannon’s two fundamental theorems of
communication. Together they speak to the two ways in which we can
manipulate redundancy: subtracting it, and adding it.

To begin with, how fast can we send a message? It depends,
Shannon showed, on how much redundancy we can wring out of it.
The most efficient message would actually resemble a string of
random text: each new symbol would be as informative as possible,
and thus as surprising as possible. Not a single symbol would be
wasted. Of course, the messages that we want to send one another—
whether telegraphs or TV broadcasts—do “waste” symbols all the
time. So the speed with which we can communicate over a given
channel depends on how we encode our messages: how we package
them, as compactly as possible, for shipment. Shannon’s first theorem
proves that there is a point of maximum compactness for every
message source. We have reached the limits of communication when
every symbol tells us something new. And because we now have an
exact measure of information, the bit, we also know how much a
message can be compressed before it reaches that point of perfect
singularity. It was one of the beauties of a physical idea of
information, a bit to stand among meters and grams: proof that the
efficiency of our communication depends not just on the qualities of
our media of talking, on the thickness of a wire or the frequency
range of a radio signal, but on something measurable, pin-downable,
in the message itself.
What remained, then, was the work of source coding: building
reliable systems to wring the excess from our all-too-humanly
redundant messages at the source, and to reconstitute them at the
destination. Shannon, along with MIT engineer Robert Fano, made an

important start in this direction, and in an encyclopedia article he
wrote some time after his famous paper, Shannon explained how a
simple redundancy-eliminating code would work. It all depends, he
said, on the statistical nature of messages: on the probability with
which a white pixel happens next to a white pixel in an image, or on
the frequencies of letters and digrams and trigrams that made those
randomly generated fragments look more and more like English.
Imagine that our language has only four letters: A, B, C, and D. Imagine
that this language, like every other, lazes itself into patterns over
time. Over time, half of the letters turn out to be A, a quarter turn out
to be B, and C and D each make up an eighth. If we wanted to send a
message in this language over the airwaves in 0’s and 1’s, what is the
best code we could use?
Perhaps we opt for the obvious solution: each letter gets the same
number of bits. For a four-letter language, we’d need two bits for each
letter:
A = 00
B = 01
C = 10
D = 11
But we can do better. In fact, when transmission speed is such a
valuable commodity (consider everything you can’t do with a dial-up
modem), we have to do better. And if we bear in mind the statistics of
this particular language, we can. It’s just a matter of using the fewest

bits on the most common letters, and using the most cumbersome
strings on the rarest ones. In other words, the least “surprising” letter
is encoded with the smallest number of bits. Imagine, Shannon
suggested, that we tried this code instead:
A=0
B = 10
C = 110
D = 111III
To prove that this code is more efficient, we can multiply the
number of bits for each letter by the chance that each letter will
occur, giving us an average of bits per letter:
(1/2)•1 + (1/4)•2 + (1/8)•3 + (1/8)•3 = 1.75.
The message sent with this second code is less redundant: rather
than using 2 bits per letter, we can express an identical idea with a
leaner 1.75. It turns out that 1.75 is a special number in this fourletter language—it’s also the amount of information, in bits, of any
letter. Here, then, we’ve reached the limit. For this language, it’s
impossible to write a more efficient code. It’s as information-dense as
possible: not a digit is wasted. Shannon’s first theorem shows that
more complex sources—audio, video, TV, Web pages—can all be
efficiently compressed in similar, if far more complex, ways.
Codes of this kind—pioneered by Shannon and Fano, and then
improved by Fano’s student David Huffman and scores of researchers
since then—are so crucial because they enormously expand the range

of messages worth sending. If we could not compress our messages, a
single audio file would take hours to download, streaming Web video
would be impossibly slow, and hours of television would demand a
bookshelf of tapes, not a small box of discs. Because we can compress
our messages, video files can be compacted to just a twentieth of their
size. All of this communication—faster, cheaper, more voluminous—
rests on Shannon’s realization of our predictability. All of that
predictability is fat to be cut; since Shannon, our signals have traveled
light.

Yet they also travel under threat. Every signal is subject to noise.
Every message is liable to corruption, distortion, scrambling, and the
most ambitious messages, the most complex pulses sent over the
greatest distances, are the most easily distorted. Sometime soon—not
in 1948, but within the lifetimes of Shannon and his Bell Labs
colleagues—human communication was going to reach the limits of
its ambition, unless noise could be solved.
That was the burden of Shannon’s second fundamental theorem.
Unlike his first, which temporarily excised noise from the equation,
the second presumed a realistically noisy world and showed us, within
that world, the bounds of our accuracy and speed. Understanding
those bounds demanded an investigation not simply of what we want
to say, but of our means of saying it: the qualities of the channel over
which our message is sent, whether that channel is a telegraph line or
a fiber-optic cable.

Shannon’s paper was the first to define the idea of channel
capacity, the number of bits per second that a channel can accurately
handle. He proved a precise relationship between a channel’s capacity
and two of its other qualities: bandwidth (or the range of frequencies
it could accommodate) and its ratio of signal to noise. Nyquist and
Hartley had both explored the trade-offs among capacity, complexity,
and speed; but it was Shannon who expressed those trade-offs in their
most precise, controllable form. The groundbreaking fact about
channel capacity, though, was not simply that it could be traded for or
traded away. It was that there is a hard cap—a “speed limit” in bits per
second—on accurate communication in any medium. Past this point,
which was soon enough named the Shannon limit, our accuracy
breaks down. Shannon gave every subsequent generation of engineers
a mark to aim for, as well as a way of knowing when they were wasting
their time in pursuit of the hopeless. In a way, he also gave them what
they had been after since the days of Thomson and the transatlantic
cable: an equation that brought message and medium under the same
laws.
This would have been enough. But it was the next step that seemed,
depending on one’s perspective, miraculous or inconceivable. Below
the channel’s speed limit, we can make our messages as accurate as
we desire—for all intents, we can make them perfectly accurate,
perfectly free from noise. This was Shannon’s furthest-reaching find:
the one Fano called “unknown, unthinkable,” until Shannon thought
it.

Until Shannon, it was simply conventional wisdom that noise had
to be endured. The means of mitigating noise had hardly changed, in
principle, since Wildman Whitehouse fried the great undersea cable.
Transmitting information, common sense said, was like transmitting
power. Expensively and precariously adding more power remained the
best answer—shouting through the static, as it were, brute-forcing the
signal-to-noise ratio by pumping out a louder signal.
Shannon’s promise of perfect accuracy was something radically
new.IV For engineering professor James Massey, it was this promise
above all that made Shannon’s theory “Copernican”: Copernican in
the sense that it productively stood the obvious on its head and
revolutionized our understanding of the world. Just as the sun
“obviously” orbited the earth, the best answer to noise “obviously” had
to do with physical channels of communication, with their power and
signal strength. Shannon proposed an unsettling inversion. Ignore the
physical channel and accept its limits: we can overcome noise by
manipulating our messages. The answer to noise is not in how loudly
we speak, but in how we say what we say.
How did the faltering transatlantic telegraph operators attempt to
deal with the corruption of their signal? They simply repeated
themselves: “Repeat, please.” “Send slower.” “Right. Right.” In fact,
Shannon showed that the beleaguered key-tappers in Ireland and
Newfoundland had essentially gotten it right, had already solved the
problem without knowing it. They might have said, if only they could
have read Shannon’s paper, “Please add redundancy.”

In a way, that was already evident enough: saying the same thing
twice in a noisy room is a way of adding redundancy, on the unstated
assumption that the same error is unlikely to attach itself to the same
place two times in a row. For Shannon, though, there was much more.
Our linguistic predictability, our congenital failure to maximize
information, is actually our best protection from error. A few pages
ago, recall, you read that the structure of our language denies us total
freedom to choose “the next letter and the next pineapple.” As soon
as you reached “pineapple”—really, as soon as you got to “p”—you
knew that something was wrong. You had detected (and probably
corrected) an error. You did it because, even without running the
numbers, you have an innate grasp of the statistical structure of
English. And that intuition told you that the odds of “pineapple”
making sense in that sentence and paragraph were lottery-winning
low. The redundancy of our language corrected the error for you. On
the other hand, imagine how much harder it would be to find an error
in the “XFOML” language, a language in which each letter is equally
likely.V
For Shannon, then, the key was once again in the code. We must be
able to write codes, he showed, in which redundancy acts as a shield:
codes in which no one bit is indispensable, and thus codes in which
any bit can absorb the damage of noise. Once more, we want to send a
message made up of the letters A through D, but this time we are less
concerned with compressing the message than with passing it safely

through a noisy channel. Again, we might start by trying the laziest
code:
A = 00
B = 01
C = 10
D = 11
One of the worst things that noise can do—in a burst of static,
interference from the atmosphere, or physical damage to the channel
—is falsify bits. Where the sender says “1,” the receiver hears “0,” or
vice versa. So if we used this code, an error to a single bit could be
fatal. If just one of the bits representing C flipped, C would vanish in
the channel: it would emerge as B or D, with the receiver none the
wiser. It would take just two such flips to turn “DAD” to “CAB.”
But we can solve the problem—just as human languages have
intuitively, automatically solved the same problem—by adding bits.
We could use a code like this:
A = 00000
B = 00111
C = 11100
D = 11011
Now any letter could sustain damage to any one bit and still
resemble itself more than any other letter. With two errors, things get
fuzzier: 00011 could be either B with one flipped bit or A with two.

But it takes fully three errors to turn one letter into another. Our new
code resists noise in a way our first one did not, and does it more
efficiently than simple repetition. We were not forced to change a
single thing about our medium of communication: no yelling across a
crowded room, no hooking up spark coils to the telegraph, no beaming
twice the television signal into the sky. We only had to signal smarter.
As long as we respect the speed limit of the channel, there is no
limit to our accuracy, no limit to the amount of noise through which
we can make ourselves heard. Yes, overcoming more errors, or
representing more characters, would demand more complex codes. So
would combining the advantages of codes that compress and codes
that guard against error: that is, reducing a message to bits as
efficiently as possible, and then adding the redundancy that protects
its accuracy. Coding and decoding would still exact their cost in effort
and time. But Shannon’s proof stood: there is always an answer. The
answer is digital. Here Shannon completed the reimagining that began
with his thesis and his switches eleven years earlier. 1’s and 0’s could
enact the entirety of logic. 1’s and 0’s stood for the fundamental
nature of information, an equal choice from a set of two. And now it
was evident that any message could be sent flawlessly—we could
communicate anything of any complexity to anyone at any distance—
provided it was translated into 1’s and 0’s. Logic is digital. Information
is digital.
So each message is kin to all messages. “Up until that time,
everyone thought that communication was involved in trying to find

ways of communicating written language, spoken language, pictures,
video, and all of these different things—that all of these would require
different ways of communicating,” said Shannon’s colleague Robert
Gallager. “Claude said no, you can turn all of them into binary digits.
And then you can find ways of communicating the binary digits.” You
can code any message as a stream of bits, without having to know
where it will go; you can transmit any stream of bits, efficiently and
reliably, without having to know where it came from. As information
theorist Dave Forney put it, “bits are the universal interface.”
In time, the thoughts developed in these seventy-seven pages in
the Bell System Technical Journal would give rise to a digital world:
satellites speaking to earth in binary code, discs that could play music
through smudges and scratches (because storage is just another
channel, and a scratch is just another noise), the world’s information
distilled into a black rectangle two inches across.
In time: because while Shannon had proven that the codes must be
there, neither he nor anyone else had shown what they must be. Once
the audacity of his work had worn off—he had, after all, founded a
new field and solved most of its problems at one stroke—one
consequential shortfall would dominate the conversation on Claude
Shannon and Claude Shannon’s theory. How long would it take to find
the codes? Once found, would they even make everyday practical
sense, or would it simply be cheaper to continue muddling through?
Could this strange work, full of imaginary languages, messages
without meaning, random text, and a philosophy that claimed to

encompass and explain every signal that could possibly be sent, ever
be more than an elegant piece of theorizing? In words with which any
engineer could have sympathized: would it work?

Yet, from the other direction and in a far different spirit, there
came another set of questions. They’re best overheard in a
conversation between Shannon and Von Neumann at Princeton, said
to have taken place in 1940, when Shannon was first piecing his
theory together in the midst of his failing marriage. Shannon
approached the great man with his idea of information-as-resolveduncertainty—which would come to stand at the heart of his work—
and with an unassuming question. What should he call this thing?
Von Neumann answered at once: say that information reduces
“entropy.” For one, it was a good, solid physics word. “And more
importantly,” he went on, “no one knows what entropy really is, so in
a debate you will always have the advantage.”
Almost certainly, this conversation never happened. But great
science tends to generate its own lore, and the story is almost coeval
with Shannon’s paper. It was retold in seminars and lectures and
books, and Shannon himself had to brush it away at conferences and
in interviews with his usual evasive laugh. The story was retold for so
long—as we are retelling it here—just because the link between
information and entropy was so suggestive.VI From one direction
came the demand that Shannon’s paper work; from the other, the

suspicion that it hinted at truths more profound than the author
himself was willing to admit.
No one knows what entropy really is. It was an overstatement; but
entropy has, at least, been a multitude of things in its conceptual life
—nearly as many things as information itself—some scientifically
sound, and some otherwise. It has been the inability of a steam engine
to do work; it has been the dissipation of heat and energy, the
unalterable tendency of every part of a closed system to lapse toward
lukewarm muck; it has been, more roughly but also more resonantly,
the trend toward disorder, chaos. It is the always incipient mess
against which we are pitted as a condition of living. James Gleick put
this succintly: “Organisms organize.” He went on:
We sort the mail, build sand castles, solve jigsaw puzzles,
separate wheat from chaff, rearrange chess pieces, collect
stamps, alphabetize books, create symmetry, compose sonnets
and sonatas, and put our rooms in order. . . . We propagate
structure (not just we humans but we who are alive). We disturb
the tendency toward equilibrium. It would be absurd to attempt
a thermodynamic accounting for such processes, but it is not
absurd to say that we are reducing entropy, piece by piece. Bit
by bit.
In pursuing all of this order, we render our world less informative,
because we reduce the amount of uncertainty available to be resolved.
The predictability of our communication is, in this light, the image of

a greater predictability. We are, all of us, predictability machines. We
think of ourselves as incessant makers and consumers of information.
But in the sense of Shannon’s entropy, the opposite is true: we are
sucking information out of the world.
Yet we are failing at it. Heat dissipates; disorder, in the very long
run, increases; entropy, the physicists tell us, runs on an eternally
upward slope. In the state of maximal entropy, all pockets of
predictability would have long since failed: each particle a surprise.
And the whole would read, were there then eyes to read it, as the most
informative of messages.
The unsettled question: whether information-as-entropy was a
misplaced and fruitless analogy, or whether it was a more or less
resonant language in which to talk about the world—or whether, in
fact, information itself was fundamental in a way that even a
physicist could appreciate. When particles jump from state to state, is
their resemblance to switches, to logic circuits, to 0’s and 1’s,
something more than a trick of our eyes? Or put it this way: Was the
quality of information something we imposed on the world, just a byproduct of our messages and machines—or was it something we found
out about the world, something that had been there all along?
These were only some of the insistent questions that trailed after
Shannon’s theory. Shannon himself—even while courting them with
the use of such a tantalizing term, or metaphor, as “entropy”—almost
always dismissed these puzzles. His was a theory of messages and

transmission and communication and codes. It was enough. “You
know where my interests are.”
But in his insistence on this point, he ran up against a human habit
much older than him: our tendency to reimagine the universe in the
image of our tools. We made clocks, and found the world to be
clockwork; steam engines, and found the world to be a machine
processing heat; information networks—switching circuits and data
transmission and half a million miles of submarine cable connecting
the continents—and found the world in their image, too.

I. Because you’re unconsciously aware of those rules, you’ve already recognized “pineapple” as a
transmission error. Given the way the paragraph and the sentence were developing, practically the only
word possible in that location was “word.”
II. In an unpublished spoof written a year later, Shannon imagined the damage his methods would do if they
fell into the wrong hands. It seems that an evil Nazi scientist, Dr. Hagen Krankheit, had escaped Germany
with a prototype of his Müllabfuhrwortmaschine, a fearsome weapon of war “anticipated in the work . . . of
Dr. Claude Shannon.” Krankheit’s machine used the principles of randomized text to totally automate the
propaganda industry. By randomly stitching together agitprop phrases in a way that approximated human
language, the Müllabfuhrwortmaschine could produce an endless flood of demoralizing statements. On one
trial run, it spat out “Subversive elements were revealed to be related by marriage to a well-known
columnist,”“Capitalist warmonger is a weak link in atomic security,” and “Atomic scientist is said to be
associated with certain religious and racial groups.” Remarkably, these machine-generated phrases were
indistinguishable from human propaganda—and now it was feared that the machine had fallen into the
hands of the communists.
III. Why not use 11 for C? In that case, it would be impossible to unambiguously decode a multi-symbol
message. 1110, for instance, could mean either “CB” or “DA.”
IV. Or more accurately, of an “arbitrarily small” rate of error: an error rate as low as we want, and want to
pay for.
V. Kahn illustrates this point with a useful thought experiment. Think of a language in which any four-letter
combination, from “aaaa” to “zzzz,” was fair game. There would be 456,976 such combinations, more than
enough to account for every word in an English dictionary. But when any letter combination is valid,
recognizing errors becomes far more difficult. “ ‘Xfim,’ meaning perhaps ‘come,’ would be changed to
‘xfem,’ maybe meaning ‘go’ and, without redundancy, no alarm bells would ring.” By contrast, ordinary
languages benefit not just from the redundancy of context (which made “pineapple” impossible above), but
from the redundancy of letters that bear no information. The loss of one dot in Morse code turns
“individual” into “endividual”—but the error is easy to detect. Most English words can suffer similar errors
to several letters before the sender’s intention is lost.

VI. The link between information and entropy was made explicit in Shannon’s paper. But a connection
between information and physics was first suggested, as early as 1929, by the Hungarian physicist Leo
Szilard. Briefly, Szilard resolved an old puzzle in the physics of heat: the Second Law of Thermodynamics
says that entropy is constantly increasing, but what if we imagined a microscopic and intelligent being,
which James Clerk Maxwell had dubbed a “demon,”that tried to decrease entropy by sorting hot molecules
from cold? Would that contradict the Second Law? Szilard showed that it would not: the very act of
determining which molecules were which would cost enough energy to offset any savings that Maxwell’s
Demon proposed to achieve. In other words—learning information about particles costs energy. Shannon,
however, had not read Szilard’s work when he wrote his 1948 paper.

17
Building a Bandwagon
He would live to see “information” turn from the name of a theory to
the name of an era. “The Magna Carta of the Information Age,”
Scientific American would call Shannon’s 1948 paper decades later.
“Without Claude’s work, the internet as we know it could not have
been created,” ran a typical piece of praise. And on and on: “A major
contribution to civilization.” “A universal clue to solving problems in
different fields of science.” “I reread it every year, with undiminished
wonder. I’m sure I get an IQ boost every time.” “I know of no greater
work of genius in the annals of technological thought.”
But in 1948, the bulk of the honors were years away. At the time,
the magnitude of information theory was intelligible only to a small
clutch of communications engineers and mathematicians and only
available in a technical journal—Bell Labs’ Bell System Technical
Journal. So it says something about the power and persuasiveness of
Shannon’s ideas that “A Mathematical Theory of Communication”
rapidly received attention well outside the confines of the Labs and

even the field of engineering, and would, in less than a decade, turn
into a kind of international phenomenon—one that Shannon himself
would, ironically and futilely, try to rein in.

In the months following publication of Shannon’s paper, word
of

a

breakthrough

propagated

through

the

community

of

communications engineers. “While, of course, Shannon was not
working in a vacuum in the 1940s, his results were so breathtakingly
original that even the communication specialists of the day were at a
loss to understand their significance,” writes information theorist R. J.
McEliece. Yet it was clear, even then, that these results would reshape
the field. Shannon’s paper quickly became the jumping-off point for
several others, which, in academic terms, is the equivalent of a round
of applause. By November, only a month after the second installment
of Shannon’s work, two derivative papers appeared, exploring the
advantages of pulse code modulation through the prism of his earlier
ideas. Five other significant papers tied directly to Shannon’s work
came out soon thereafter.
Thus, beginning with the small but dedicated readership of the Bell
System Technical Journal, news of information theory rippled through
the mathematical and engineering worlds. It piqued the interest of
one reader in particular, who would become Shannon’s most
important popularizer: Warren Weaver, the director of the Division of
Natural Sciences at the Rockefeller Foundation, one of the principal
funders of science and mathematics research in the country.

Weaver had entered Shannon’s life earlier, when, with the support
of Thornton Fry and Vannevar Bush, he awarded Shannon a contract
to work on fire control during the war. Now he would play an even
more pivotal role in Shannon’s career, as the catalyst behind the
book-length

publication

of

“A

Mathematical

Theory

of

Communication”—a book that would do for the theory what a
technical journal article could not.

The two had met in the fall of 1948 and discussed the theory.
Weaver, perhaps through an excess of enthusiasm, foresaw a world in
which information theory could help computers fight the Cold War
and enable instantaneous rendering of Soviet documents into English.
Inspired, he praised Shannon’s work with exuberance to the head of
the Rockefeller Foundation, Chester Barnard. In early 1949, Weaver
sent Barnard his own layman’s translation of “A Mathematical Theory
of Communication.”
“Weaver became the expositor of Shannon almost by accident,” a
recent history observed. By accident, indeed: Weaver’s memo might
have remained another forgotten interdepartmental missive, or an
unread article in a journal, had it not been for the intervention of two
men: Louis Ridenour, dean of graduate studies at the University of
Illinois, and Wilbur Schramm, head of the university’s Institute for
Communications Research.
Ridenour had spent the early part of the twentieth century at the
rich intersection of physics and geopolitics. During World War II, he

worked at the renowned MIT Radiation Laboratory, commonly known
as the Rad Lab. The Rad Lab began with outsize ambitions, as an effort
to perfect mass-produced radar technology to defeat the German
Luftwaffe’s bombing runs against the British. It also had mysterious
origins. Funded by Alfred Lee Loomis, the intensely private
millionaire financier, attorney, and self-taught physicist, the lab was
initially bankrolled entirely by Loomis himself. It created most of the
radar systems used to identify German U-boats—and its network of
scientists and technicians became much of the nucleus of the
Manhattan Project. As Lee DuBridge, the lab’s director, would later
quip, “Radar won the war; the atom bomb ended it.” This was the
world of fighting man’s physics.
Weaver met Ridenour on official business in Champaign-Urbana,
Illinois, while exploring whether the Rockefeller Foundation should
fund a biological sciences program at the university. He shared a copy
of his rendition of Shannon’s paper with Ridenour. He, in turn, passed
the draft to Schramm, another one of the University of Illinois’s
brightest stars, whose Institute for Communications Research was
beginning to lay the foundation of communications as a formal field
of study. By some accounts the first communications scholar,
Schramm established the now world-famous Iowa Writers’ Workshop,
home to authors from Robert Penn Warren to Marilynne Robinson.
Communications was, in a way, an ironic choice of field for
Schramm. A botched childhood tonsillectomy had left him with a
severe stutter, which so embarrassed him that, honored as the

valedictorian of his high school class, he opted to play the flute
instead of giving a speech. Speech difficulties notwithstanding, he
graduated summa cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa from Marietta
College, paused at Harvard for a master’s, and completed a PhD in
American literature at the University of Iowa, while undergoing
treatment at a famous stammering clinic in Iowa City.
Schramm’s many academic responsibilities included overseeing the
University of Illinois Press—and, encouraged by Ridenour, he saw the
opportunity in a version of the “Mathematical Theory” for the general
public. His motives, and Ridenour’s as well, were those of practiced
institution builders. Schramm’s institute sought credibility in any
form for the emerging field of “communications studies.” Ridenour
knew that the University of Illinois was debating the purchase of a
computer. A volume featuring Warren Weaver and Claude Shannon
published by the university would be the perfect complement to the
“press’s new series of lectures by computer builders—setting up both
Ridenour and Schramm to accomplish their respective projects.”
Whatever the motives, the book became a reality. By the
admittedly modest standards of university presses, the volume was a
roaring success. Debuting in 1949, a year after the theory was made
public, The Mathematical Theory of Communication sold 6,000 copies
in its first four years of printing; by 1990, it had sold more than
51,000 copies, putting it among the bestselling academic books
published by a university press.

The book was ultimately one part Shannon, two parts Weaver: Part
I featured Shannon’s original 1948 work; Parts II and III, by Weaver,
attempted to explain the theory in as close to layman’s terms as
possible. The book’s organization created the unintended impression
of Weaver as a key contributor to the theory’s development.
Commentators and observers would, for decades, refer to the
“Shannon and Weaver” theory of information or even go so far as to
call Weaver a cofounder of the theory. Weaver never indulged the
inaccuracies. He was quick to correct the record, telling Ridenour, “No
one could recognize more keenly than I do that my own contribution
is infinitesimal as compared with Shannon’s.”
In fact, the only issue Weaver had with the text was a concern that
it

might

have

exaggerated

his

role

in

information

theory’s

development. Because his section was really an introduction to
Shannon’s work, it should have come first:
There could very easily have been a short statement (perhaps
most appropriately by myself?) apologising for coming first with
my very modest bit, explaining why that is sensible, and
expressing the great hope that all will be thus led on to study
the really serious and important part of the book.
While Weaver fretted over appearing to claim false credit,
Schramm and Ridenour celebrated. The volume’s publication
accomplished everything they could have hoped for. By 1952, the
University of Illinois had succeeded in acquiring a digital computer,

and simultaneously, it was awarded a large federal contract for the
study of “communication theory.”

The publication of The Mathematical Theory of Communication
stands as one of the defining moments in the history of information
theory, and not only on account of its commercial success. Even the
title sent an important message: in the span of a year, Shannon’s
original “A Mathematical Theory of Communication” had become the
definitive “The Mathematical Theory of Communication.” As electrical
engineer and information theorist Robert Gallager pointed out, the
subtle change in the article’s context, from one of several articles in a
technical journal to centerpiece of a book, was a mark of supremacy.
It stood for the scientific community’s growing recognition that
Shannon’s theory stood alone.

18
Mathematical Intentions, Honorable and
Otherwise
It’s one of the curses of scientific discoveries that they are greeted,
remarkably often, with misunderstanding or outright dismissal.
Charles Darwin’s geology teacher, the famed Adam Sedgwick, wrote to
his student after the publication of On the Origin of Species, “I have
read your book with more pain than pleasure. Parts of it I admired
greatly, parts I laughed at till my sides were almost sore; other parts I
read with absolute sorrow, because I think them utterly false and
grievously mischievous.” Sylvia Nasar, writing about John Nash’s
Nobel Prize–winning work on game theory, remarked that his ideas
“seemed initially too simple to be truly interesting, too narrow to be
widely applicable, and, later on, so obvious that its discovery by
someone was deemed all but inevitable.” Scientific revolutions are
rarely unopposed.
Shannon’s work, too, was coldly received in some quarters. The
first major criticism, and the one with the most edge to it, came from

the mathematician Joseph L. Doob. Brought from the Midwest to New
York at the age of three, he was marked out as a bright student early
and enrolled in New York’s Ethical Culture Fieldston School. The
school was unique in New York society at the time: its founder’s belief
that the poor deserved the highest-caliber education was radical, but
the school’s academic reputation also drew the well-heeled. Over the
twentieth century, it would produce such alumni as Marvin Minsky, a
pioneer of artificial intelligence and future colleague of Shannon’s,
and J. Robert Oppenheimer, the father of the atomic bomb.
After excelling there, Doob departed for Harvard, where, it is said,
he grew so frustrated with the plodding pace of math instruction that
he took sophomore and junior calculus simultaneously—and aced
both. Unlike many of his fellow students, Doob never harbored any
doubts about his future as a mathematician.
His confidence showed in the scale of the work he attempted: his
1953 book on probability theory, an 800-page tome, was greeted as
the most influential work on the topic since the nineteenth century.
His assurance displayed itself in another way too: Doob was a fierce
critic of anything he regarded as flabby thinking. Doob was open
about the fact that he was, perhaps too frequently, looking for
trouble. Asked why he became interested in mathematics in the first
place, he answered:
I have always wanted to understand what I was doing, and why I
was doing it, and I have often been a pest because I have
objected when what I heard or read was not to be taken literally.

The boy who noticed that the emperor wasn’t dressed and
objected loudly has always been my model. Mathematics
seemed to match my psychology, a mistake reflecting the fact
that somehow I did not take into account that mathematics is
created by humans.
His sharp words, friends recalled, often came mixed with humor.
Once, he and a colleague, Robert Kaufman, fell into a heated argument
about whether students ought to be required to read classic literature.
“Robert was all for it, and Joe was doing everything to provoke him. In
disgust, Robert said: ‘Oh my God!’ and Joe calmly replied, ‘Please don’t
exaggerate, just call me Professor.’ ”
Above all, Doob professed loyalty to the “austere and often
abstruse” world of pure mathematics. If applied mathematics
concerns itself with concrete questions, pure mathematics exists for
its own sake. Its cardinal questions are not “How do we encrypt a
telephone conversation?” but rather “Are there infinitely many twin
primes?” or “Does every true mathematical statement have a proof?”
The divorce between the two schools has ancient origins. Historian
Carl Boyer traces it to Plato, who regarded mere computation as
suitable for a merchant or a general, who “must learn the art of
numbers or he will not know how to array his troops.” But the
philosopher must study higher mathematics, “because he has to arise
out of the sea of change and lay hold of true being.” Euclid, the father
of geometry, was a touch snobbier: “There is a tale told of him that
when one of his students asked of what use was the study of

geometry, Euclid asked his slave to give the student threepence, ‘since
he must make gain of what he learns.’ ”
Closer to our times, the twentieth-century mathematician G. H.
Hardy would write what became the ur-text of pure math. A
Mathematician’s Apology is a “manifesto for mathematics itself,”
which pointedly borrowed its title from Socrates’s argument in the
face of capital charges. For Hardy, mathematical elegance was an end
in itself. “Beauty is the first test,” he insisted. “There is no permanent
place in the world for ugly mathematics.” A mathematician, then, is
not a mere solver of practical problems. He, “like a painter or a poet, is
a maker of patterns. If his patterns are more permanent than theirs, it
is because they are made with ideas.” By contrast, run-of-the-mill
applied mathematics was “dull,” “ugly,” “trivial,” and “elementary.”
It was the pure mathematicians who looked down on Von
Neumann’s work on game theory, calling it, among other things, “just
the latest fad” and “déclassé.” The same group would level a similar
judgment against John Nash—just as Doob would against Claude
Shannon.

As America’s leading probability theorist, Doob was well
positioned to review Shannon’s work. His critique appeared in the
pages of Mathematical Review in 1949. After briefly summarizing the
contents of Shannon’s paper, he dismissed them with a sentence that
would irritate Shannon’s supporters for years: “The discussion is
suggestive throughout, rather than mathematical, and it is not always

clear that the author’s mathematical intentions are honorable.” By the
genteel standards of an academic review, this was lacerating, the
equivalent of pistols at dawn.
Nearly forty years later, interviewer Anthony Liversidge raised the
issue of the Doob critique with Shannon:
LIVERSIDGE: When The Mathematical Theory of Communication

was published, there was an indignant review by a certain
mathematician, accusing you of mathematical dishonesty
because your results weren’t proved, he said, with
mathematical rigor. Did you think that plain silly, or did you
think, “Well, maybe I should work hard to meet his
criticisms?”
SHANNON:

I didn’t like his review. He hadn’t read the paper

carefully. You can write mathematics line by line with each
tiny inference indicated, or you can assume that the reader
understands what you are talking about. I was confident I
was correct, not only in an intuitive way but in a rigorous
way. I knew exactly what I was doing, and it all came out
exactly right.
Shannon rarely, if ever, felt the need to defend himself; the Doob
critique, in other words, had clearly gotten to him. What’s more,
Shannon was fully aware of his having vaulted over some of the
intervening mathematics in the interest of practicality. Importantly,
he

noted

in

the

middle

of

“A

Mathematical

Theory

of

Communication” that “the occasional liberties taken with limiting
processes in the present analysis can be justified in all cases of
practical interest.” This made sense: his primary readers were
communications engineers; practical intentions mattered as much as,
if not more than, purely mathematical ones. For Doob to critique the
precision of his math felt, to many of Shannon’s acolytes, a bit like
examining the Mona Lisa and finding fault with the frame.
Ironically, Doob’s claim that the paper was not mathematical
enough ran up against the opposite complaint from engineers. As the
mathematician Solomon Golomb put it, “When Shannon’s paper
appeared, some communications engineers found it to be too
mathematical (there are twenty-three theorems!) and too theoretical.”
The

problem,

in

hindsight,

might

not

have

been

Doob’s

misunderstanding of the mathematics at work; rather, he didn’t
understand that Shannon’s math was a means to an end. “In reality,”
said Golomb, “Shannon had almost unfailing instinct for what was
actually

true

and

gave

outlines

of

proofs

that

other

mathematicians . . . would make fully rigorous.” In the words of one of
Shannon’s later collaborators, “Distinguished and accomplished as
Doob was, the gaps in Shannon’s paper which seemed large to Doob
seemed like small and obvious steps to Shannon. Doob might not
realize this for, how often if ever, would he have encountered a mind
like Shannon’s?”
The information theorist Sergio Verdú offered a similar assessment
of Shannon’s paper: “It turned out that everything he claimed

essentially was true. The paper was weak in what we now call
‘converses’ . . . but in fact, that adds to his genius rather than
detracting from it, because he really knew what he was doing.” In a
sense, leaving the dots for others to connect was a calculated gamble
on Shannon’s part: had he gone through that painstaking work
himself, the paper would have been much longer and appeared much
later, both factors that would have likely diminished its reception. By
the end of the 1950s, other engineers and mathematicians in both the
United States and the Soviet Union had followed Shannon’s lead—and
translated Shannon’s creative and rigorous explanations into both the
language of pure mathematicians and the language of engineers.
Criticism like Doob’s may have stung—but there was a measure of
respect in the fact that a mathematician of Doob’s stature had read
Shannon’s work at all. Doob and Shannon also settled their
differences in 1963. Shannon was invited by the American
Mathematical Society to deliver the prestigious Josiah Willard Gibbs
Lecture, a signal honor within the field. The person who introduced
him on that night—and, as the society’s president, surely had a hand
in the invitation—was none other than Joseph L. Doob.

19
Wiener
He was, according to one writer, “the American John von Neumann”—
and the exaggeration was almost excusable.
Born in Columbia, Missouri, Norbert Wiener was shaped by a father
single-mindedly focused on molding his young son into a genius. Leo
Wiener used an extraordinary personal library—and an extraordinary
will—to homeschool young Norbert until the age of nine. “I had full
liberty to roam in what was the very catholic and miscellaneous
library of my father,” Wiener wrote. “At one period or other the
scientific interests of my father had covered most of the imaginable
subjects of study.”
But Leo’s training was also unsparing, even cruel, and his son was
denied a normal childhood. In a passage from Ex-Prodigy: My
Childhood and Youth, his memoir, Wiener recalls his father’s
instruction:
He would begin the discussion in an easy, conversational tone.
This lasted exactly until I made the first mathematical mistake.

Then the gentle and loving father was replaced by the avenger
of the blood. . . . Father was raging, I was weeping, and my
mother did her best to defend me, although hers was a losing
battle.
At one point, a doctor ordered young Norbert to stop reading; his
eyesight could afford no additional strain. Leo decided that what his
son could not read, he could memorize. Even a doctor’s concern
couldn’t stop Wiener’s determined father: Leo would lecture
endlessly, and young Norbert would be expected to capture every
word and thought.
In a purely professional sense, the intense regimen of schooling
paid dividends. By age eleven, Wiener had already finished high
school. Three years after that, at the age of fourteen, he graduated
Tufts with a degree in mathematics. From there it was on to Harvard
to study zoology, Cornell to study philosophy, and finally, a return to
Harvard, where, by seventeen, he earned a PhD in mathematics with a
specialty in logic. The climb into the elite echelons of mathematics—
and the kind of life his father might have wished for his son—had
begun.
But the scars of such a childhood were obvious for all to see. He
had been a child coming of age around people many years his senior.
And as often happens, he was ridiculed cruelly and mercilessly by the
older children; the result was an intense awkwardness that followed
him his entire life. It didn’t help that, in appearance, Wiener was easy
to ridicule. Bearded, bespectacled, nearsighted, with red-veined skin

and a ducklike walk, there was hardly a stereotype of the addle-pated
academic that Wiener did not fulfill. “From every angle of vision there
was something idiosyncratic about Norbert Wiener,” mused Paul
Samuelson. Hans Freudenthal remembered,
In appearance and behaviour, Norbert Wiener was a baroque
figure, short, rotund, and myopic, combining these and many
qualities in extreme degree. His conversation was a curious
mixture of pomposity and wantonness. He was a poor
listener. . . . He spoke many languages but was not easy to
understand in any of them. He was a famously bad lecturer.
The anecdotes about him fill the pages of other mathematicians’
memoirs, and nearly all are the kind that were first shared behind
Wiener’s back. As one story had it, Wiener arrived at what he thought
was his home and fumbled with his keys, finding that they would not
fit in the lock. He turned to the children playing in the street and
asked, “Can you show me where the Wieners live?” A little girl replied,
“Follow me, Daddy. Mommy sent me here to point the way to our new
house.”

His contributions to mathematics were as broad as they were
deep: quantum mechanics, Brownian motion, cybernetics, stochastic
processes, harmonic analysis—there was hardly a corner of the
mathematical universe that his intellect left untouched. By 1948, he
had a CV packed with glittering awards and honors. Wiener’s list of

collaborators and contacts was similarly striking: Vannevar Bush, G.
H. Hardy, Bertrand Russell, Paul Lévy, Kurt Gödel . . . and Claude
Shannon.
At MIT, Shannon had taken Wiener’s class in Fourier analysis. A
half century later, reflecting on his time in graduate school, Shannon
would remember Wiener as “an idol of mine when I was a young
student.” Shannon seems not have made a similar impression on
Wiener, who wrote in his 1956 memoir, “Shannon and I had relatively
little contact during his stay here [at MIT] as a student.” He added,
though, that “since then, the two of us have developed along parallel
if different directions, and our scientific relations have greatly
broadened and deepened.”
Wiener was twenty-two years older than Shannon, so it reveals
something about the advanced degree of Shannon’s thinking and the
importance of his work that, as early as 1945, Wiener was nervous
about which of them would win the race for credit for information
theory. Their contest began in earnest in 1946.
As the story goes, the manuscript that formed the outlines of
Wiener’s contributions to information theory was nearly lost to
humanity. Wiener had entrusted the manuscript to Walter Pitts, a
graduate student, who had checked it as baggage for a trip from New
York’s Grand Central Terminal to Boston. Pitts forgot to retrieve the
baggage. Realizing his mistake, he asked two friends to pick up the
bag. They either ignored or forgot the request. Only five months later

was the manuscript finally tracked down; it had been labeled
“unclaimed property” and cast aside in a coatroom.
Wiener was, understandably, blind with rage. “Under these
circumstances please consider me as completely dissociated from
your future career,” he wrote to Pitts. He complained to one
administrator of the “total irresponsibleness of the boys” and to
another faculty member that the missing parcel meant that he had
“lost priority on some important work.” “One of my competitors,
Shannon of the Bell Telephone Company, is coming out with a paper
before mine,” he fumed. Wiener wasn’t being needlessly paranoid:
Shannon had, by that point, previewed his still-unpublished work at
1947 conferences at Harvard and Columbia. In April 1947, Wiener and
Shannon shared the same stage, and both had the opportunity to
present early versions of their thoughts. Wiener, in a moment of
excessive self-regard, would write to a colleague, “The Bell people are
fully accepting my thesis concerning statistics and communications
engineering.”

Wiener’s contribution was contained within the wide-ranging
book Cybernetics, which had its debut in the same year as Shannon’s
two-part paper. If Shannon’s 1948 work was, at least initially,
relatively unknown to the wider public, Wiener’s notion of
cybernetics—a word he derived from the Greek for “steersman” to
encompass “the entire field of control and communications theory,
whether in the machine or in the animal”—aroused intense public

interest from the moment it was published. A bestseller, the book
managed to find its way into the hands of nontechnical readers. The
praise was fulsome, the kind of acclaim that most authors work a
lifetime to achieve. In the New York Times, the physicist John R. Platt
ranked Cybernetics as one of those books that “might be comparable
in ultimate importance to, say, Galileo or Malthus or Rousseau or
Mill.” One of Wiener’s most ardent supporters, Gregory Bateson,
called cybernetics “the biggest bite out of the fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge that mankind has taken in the past 2,000 years.”
Wiener must have found words like that especially gratifying in
light of his efforts to position cybernetics as the era’s Theory of
Everything. Few qualities set Wiener and Shannon apart more than
their attitudes toward publicity. “Wiener, in a sense, did a lot to push
the idea of cybernetics, which is a somewhat vague idea, and got a lot
of worldwide publicity for it,” said Stanford’s Thomas Kailath. “But
that wasn’t Shannon’s personality at all. Wiener loved the publicity,
and Shannon could not have cared less.”
The popular success of Cybernetics launched a debate over priority
within the small clique of mathematicians who wanted to know
whether Wiener or Shannon could rightly claim credit for information
theory. It also gave rise to a dispute over whether or not Wiener—
whose chapter on information as a statistical quantity was admittedly
a small section of his book—even knew what information theory
meant.

Shannon’s 1948 paper, for its part, gave Wiener credit for
influencing his view of the statistical nature of communication. But as
more attention was paid to the field, Shannon came to realize that he
differed from Wiener in some important respects. For one, Shannon
insisted that meaning had nothing to do with the transmission of
information, a point he believed was critical; Wiener’s view of
information, on the other hand, included meaning. But perhaps the
most significant distinction between their efforts is that the analysis
of coding, and its power to protect information transmission from
noise, is absent from Wiener’s work. Shannon, an engineer by training
and inclination, attacked the problem of noise as an engineer might—
and his Fundamental Theorem for a Discrete Channel with Noise is
the starting point for much of the coding that makes modern
information technology possible. This was the key element missing
from Wiener’s work and the reason, it seems, that Wiener’s efforts to
claim credit for information theory rankled many of Shannon’s
followers. As Sergio Verdú, an information theorist of a later era, put
it, “in fact, there is no evidence that Wiener ever grasped the notion,
at the heart of information theory, of operational meaning lent by a
coding theorem.”

In the 1950s and 1960s, though, both Shannon and Wiener were
more circumspect. Neither took explicit issue with the other’s
understanding, and though they frequently attended the same
conferences and wrote in the pages of the same journals, no

significant barbs seem to have been traded between them. But by the
1980s, Shannon concluded that Wiener had not fully comprehended
his work. “When I talked to Norbert, like in the 1950s and so on, I
never got the feeling that he understood what I was talking about.” In
another interview, Shannon was even more blunt: “I don’t think
Wiener had much to do with information theory. He wasn’t a big
influence on my ideas there, though I once took a course from him.”
Given Shannon’s habitual lack of interest in these sorts of
confrontations, statements like those are telling. But for the most
part, he left the struggle for credit to others.
By the standards of the great mathematical feuds—Gottfried
Leibniz and Isaac Newton battling over custody of calculus, or Henri
Poincaré and Bertrand Russell debating the nature of mathematical
reasoning—the rivalry between Shannon and Wiener is, sadly, less
spectacular than biographers might prefer. But it still stands as an
important moment in Shannon’s story. Shannon gave the impression
of the carefree scholar—someone secure enough in his own intellect
and reputation to brush aside the opinion of others. Wiener’s opinions
and contribution mattered—but not because Shannon worried about
who would or wouldn’t receive credit. Debates in his field mattered to
him less for their opportunities to assert “ownership” of information
theory than for their bearing on the substance of information theory
itself. Credit, in the end, counted less than accuracy.

20
A Transformative Year
Shannon turned thirty-two in 1948. The conventional wisdom in
mathematical circles had long held that thirty is the age by which a
young mathematician ought to have accomplished his foremost work;
the professional mathematician’s fear of aging is not so different from
the professional athlete’s. “For most people, thirty is simply the
dividing line between youth and adulthood,” writes John Nash
biographer Sylvia Nasar, “but mathematicians consider their calling a
young man’s game, so thirty signals something far more gloomy.”
Shannon was two years late by that standard, but he had made it.
Roughly ten years of work had become seventy-seven pages of
information theory, and the work had been worthwhile by all
accounts. Shannon had won a small measure of fame and had
established himself as a first-rate theoretical mind. His work was the
springboard for that of others, a sign that he had laid some important
foundations. He had made a name for himself within the demanding
and insular world of Bell Labs. That year, 1948, would have

transformed Shannon on those bases alone. But there was more than
mathematics reshaping his life that fall.

Besides jousting with him on matters of the intellect, John Pierce
played one other significant role in Claude Shannon’s life, in a matter
of the heart: he was responsible, indirectly, for introducing Shannon
to his future wife, Betty Moore, a young analyst at Bell Labs. Pierce
was Moore’s immediate supervisor, and it was in the course of
dropping by to see Pierce in 1948 that Shannon struck up a
conversation with her. Taciturn though he might have been, Shannon
had it in him to summon the courage to ask Betty out to dinner. That
dinner led to a second, the second to a third, until they were dining
together every night.
He charmed her, and they both seemed to share a sense of ironic
detachment, a feeling that the world was frequently conspiring to
make them chuckle. As their dates grew longer and more frequent,
they split time between his West Village apartment and hers on East
Eighteenth Street. There, the two shared their mutual loves:
mathematics and music. “I played piano and he played clarinet,” she
recalled, “and we’d come home from work, and we found some books
of music that had two parts, and we’d enjoy playing together.”
Born on April 14, 1922, Betty was an only child. In the early part of
her life, the family lived on Staten Island, but they later moved to
Manhattan. Betty Moore’s mother and aunt had emigrated to America
from Hungary, so the soundtrack of her childhood contained as much

Hungarian as accented English. Like many immigrants, the family
struggled to find a foothold in their adopted country, and they were
struck hard by the Great Depression. Her father faced periods of
unemployment, eventually finding a role on the support staff of the
New York Times. Her mother found steadier work in the fur business,
though she was forced to prematurely end her schooling to provide
for the family.
Money was always tight. When the Depression hit, they nearly lost
their home. A New Deal homeowners’ program saved the family from
foreclosure, a moment that Betty never forgot. By her daughter’s
account, “My mother was eternally grateful to FDR and to the New
Deal and the protections FDR put in place. They managed to keep the
house and survive.”
Betty attended Catholic schools, though, she was quick to add, not
because of any particular religiosity on her parents’ part. Her mother
was Catholic, her father Episcopalian, but they chose Catholic schools
for Betty because the public school in their neighborhood had
unexpectedly closed. Betty proved a gifted student, and by the time
she was ready to graduate, several colleges offered her both admission
and scholarships.
She had her heart set on Cornell, but the scholarship fell short of
the full cost of tuition, and her parents could offer no help. So when a
letter arrived offering a full scholarship to the New Jersey College for
Women—along with a job offer—Betty wept. Now she’d be able to

attend college close to home and even send a bit of money back to her
parents. As her daughter, Peggy, recalled, “it changed her life.”
Betty Moore studied mathematics at the New Jersey College for
Women (now Rutgers University’s Douglass College); like many
colleges at the time, it was still recovering from the Depression.
Enrollments and funding had both been cut, and a feeling of
economic uncertainty lingered on campus. Yet by the time Moore was
a sophomore, economic troubles had become comparatively trivial.
America was at war, and the campus mobilized in support: “students
and faculty formed relief organizations, rolled bandages and entered
war production industries.”
Betty was matter-of-fact, whip-smart, and had a wry sense of
humor. She was an avid reader, and those who knew her marked her
out as unusually bright. Her choice of major was well suited to the
times, and she “fortunately had good grades.” As she recalled, “at that
point they were very much looking for math majors, particularly
women, because the men were all in the service.” Bell Labs was among
those companies on the search for any and all talented graduates in
the field. As she neared graduation day, the Labs gave Betty “the best
offer of any of the jobs I had been offered,” and she accepted.
She started work in the mathematics department, focusing on
microwave research, and then moved to the fast-growing radar group.
“Just working there was fascinating,” she recalled. And, “considering
that the world was in a mess, we were very lucky.” She moved back
home with her parents and continued to contribute to the household;

Betty would support her parents in some way for the rest of their
lives.

Of the Claude she knew in the early days, she would say that “he
was very quiet and had a wonderful sense of humor.” Their courtship
began just as Shannon was beginning to achieve a measure of fame for
his information theory work, but his rising star seems not to have
interfered with their early dating life. That’s partly because Shannon
was consumed by affection for Betty. It had been seven years since
the dissolution of his marriage to Norma, and just as before, the
courtship moved efficiently. Betty and Claude met in the fall of 1948
and, by early 1949, Claude had proposed—in his “not very formal”
way, as Betty recalled. She accepted, and on March 22, they were
married. The wedding was a small affair; as Betty tells it, the only
guest “we had from Claude’s family was his sister Catherine.” The
newlyweds soon left the city and moved to Morristown, New Jersey,
close to Bell Labs’ new facility in Murray Hill.
Nearly all who knew them testified to how good a match Betty was
for Claude Shannon—in every sense. It wasn’t just the joy he found in
her company, though he did. Betty and Claude became professional
partners, as well. Albert Einstein famously said of his wife, Mileva
Maric, “I need my wife. She solves all the mathematical problems for
me.” Claude’s work was very much his own, but there’s no denying
Betty’s help in bringing it to fruition; she became one of his closest

advisers on mathematical matters. She looked up references, took
down his thoughts, and, importantly, edited his written work.
Claude’s gifts were of the Einsteinian variety: a strong intuitive feel
for the dimensions of a problem, with less of a concern for the stepby-step details. As he put it, “I think I’m more visual than symbolic. I
try to get a feeling of what’s going on. Equations come later.” Like
Einstein, he needed a sounding board, a role that Betty played
perfectly. His colleague David Slepian said, “He didn’t know math very
deeply. But he could invent whatever he needed.” Robert Gallager,
another colleague, went a step further: “He had a weird insight. He
could see through things. He would say, ‘Something like this should
be true’ . . . and he was usually right. . . . You can’t develop an entire
field out of whole cloth if you don’t have superb intuition.”
The trouble with that kind of intuition is that solutions to
problems appear before the details and intermediary steps do.
Shannon, like many an intuitive mind before him, loathed showing his
work. So Betty, who could hold her own mathematically, became his
scribe. She was also the first audience for many of his ideas—the most
notable exception to the introverted policy of a man who, as she put
it, “wouldn’t go out of his way to collaborate with other people.”
Taking dictation, she would also offer her improvements and edits,
and add historical references that occurred to her. In later life, when
Claude’s memory would fail him about this or that reference to a
mathematical paper, she would step in and remind him. As Betty put
it, “some of his early papers and even later papers are in my

handwriting, so called, and not in his, which confused people at first.”
Confusing, perhaps—but also testament to one of the great
mathematical marriages of our time: one that produced path-breaking
work and lasted the rest of Claude’s life.

21
TMI
Alongside pieces on “Tax Reform,” “How to Get a Raise,” and “Olin, an
Industrial Empire,” the December 1953 issue of Fortune magazine
offered the mass public a first, digestible look at “The Information
Theory.” Five years after the publication of Shannon’s paper in the
Bell System Technical Journal, it had become the subject of a fulllength feature in a magazine whose audience was made up of more
than

engineers

and

mathematicians.

Francis

Bello,

Fortune’s

technology editor and the writer of the piece, was to become one of
Shannon’s champions in the popular press.
Bello’s article opened with a haymaker:
Great scientific theories, like great symphonies and great novels,
are among man’s proudest—and rarest—creations. What sets
the scientific theory apart from and, in a sense, above the other
creations is that it may profoundly and rapidly alter man’s view
of the world.

In this century man’s views, not to say his life, have already
been deeply altered by such scientific insights as relatively
theory and quantum theory. Within the last five years a new
theory has appeared that seems to bear some of the same
hallmarks of greatness. The new theory, still almost unknown to
the

general

public,

goes

under

either

of

two

names:

communication theory or information theory. Whether or not it
will ultimately rank with the enduring great is a question now
being resolved in a score of major laboratories here and abroad.
Though Shannon praised an early draft of the article, calling it a
“bang-up job of scientific reporting,” he took characteristic exception
to these two opening paragraphs. “Much as I wish it were so,
communication theory is not in the same league with relativity and
quantum mechanics. The first two paragraphs should be rewritten
with a much more modest and realistic view of the importance of the
theory.” Shannon also urged Bello to acknowledge Norbert Wiener for
his contemporary work on cybernetics—and to make sure Bell Labs
researchers were given their due.
Bello did give some credit to Wiener and others—but he did
nothing to deflate information theory’s potential. He continued: “It
may be no exaggeration to say that man’s progress in peace, and
security in war, depend more on fruitful applications of information
theory than on physical demonstrations, either in bombs or in power
plants, that Einstein’s famous equation works.”

Comparisons to Einstein were to become a permanent fixture of
Shannon’s public life. “Shannon is to communications as Einstein is to
physics,” went a typical line, following Bello’s lead. When the town of
Gaylord unveiled its Claude Shannon statue, the local paper
remembered him as the “Gaylord native son . . . who will be revered
forever

as

the

Einstein

of

the

mathematical

theory

of

communication.” William Poundstone may have made the most
memorable observation: “There were many at Bell Labs and MIT who
compared Shannon’s insight to Einstein’s. Others found that
comparison unfair—unfair to Shannon.” Despite Shannon’s protests,
the similarities impressed themselves on his contemporaries:
revolutionary theoretical work, a kind of playfulness of spirit, a
curious combination of creative skill and the ability to stand apart
from the prestige-soaked, ladder-climbing world of elite academia.

But Shannon had to acclimate himself to the praise. In June 1954,
shortly after his piece, Bello included Shannon on a list of the twenty
most important scientists in America. Beginning with the questions,
“What kind of man becomes an outstanding scientist? Is there a
widening gulf between him and the rest of society?” Bello interviewed
more than 100 scientists and sent questionnaires to dozens more in
search of answers.
Along with Shannon, the resulting list included a twenty-six-yearold, boyish-looking molecular biologist working at the Cavendish
Laboratory in Cambridge, England. Eight years later, at the age of

thirty-four, James Watson won the Nobel Prize, along with Francis
Crick and Maurice Wilkins, for discovering the double helix of DNA.
Another of Bello’s profilees was a thirty-six-year-old wunderkind
physicist. Richard Feynman, too, shared a Nobel in 1965 for his work
on quantum electrodynamics. In fact, one-quarter of the twenty
scientists Bello singled out for recognition would go on to win that
honor.
With similar encomia in Time, Life, and a host of other major
publications, Shannon had reached the heights of scientific celebrity
—in a postwar era in which the figure of “the Scientist” had itself
reached its apex of cultural prestige.
The press, understandably, was as interested in the curious man
behind the new theory of information as it was in the theory itself.
Shannon seems to have taken public recognition of his work with a
kind of bemused detachment, as in this interview with Omni:
OMNI: Did you feel you were destined for fame?
SHANNON: I don’t think so. I always thought I was quite sharp

scientifically, but scientists by and large don’t get the press
that politicians or authors or other people do. I thought my
paper on switching was quite good, and I got a prize for it,
and I thought my information paper was very good, and I got
all kinds of acclaim for that—there’s a wallful of prizes and
stuff in the other room.
OMNI: Do you find fame a burden?

SHANNON:

Not too much. I have people like you coming and

wasting my afternoons, but that isn’t too much of a burden!

By the mid-1950s, Shannon’s work had been celebrated in the
popular press and applied in a diverse array of fields, sometimes with
only the loosest appreciation for what information theory actually
meant. For theoretical work as suggestive as information theory—
which to a casual reader might appear to offer a rubric for everything
from mass media to geology—appropriation and misappropriation
were inevitable. For instance: “Birds clearly have the problem of
communicating in the presence of noise,” ran one contemporary
paper. “An examination of birdsong on the basis of information
theory might . . . suggest new types of field experiment and analysis.”
Invoking “information theory,” like any fashionable term, was often a
shortcut to research funding. At the same time, the elegance and
simplicity of Shannon’s theory made it an attractive tool across
disciplines. Even if the potential for overuse had troubled him, the
normally conflict-averse Shannon might have been expected to
simply laugh, shrug his shoulders, and move on to other problems. In
the main, this is mostly what he did—with one important exception.
In 1955, Louis A. de Rosa, the chairman of the Institute of Radio
Engineers’ Professional Group on Information Theory, published an
editorial in the group’s newsletter. De Rosa’s “In Which Fields Do We
Graze?” was a genuine query of his colleagues working in information
theory:

The expansion of the applications of Information Theory to
fields other than radio and wired communications has been so
rapid that oftentimes the bounds within which the Professional
Group interests lie are questioned. . . . Should an attempt be
made to extend our interests to such fields as management,
biology, psychology, and linguistic theory, or should the
concentration be strictly in the direction of communication by
radio or wire?
Shannon himself took to the pages of IRE’s journal to address the
matter in a brief pronouncement titled “The Bandwagon.” The 573word response begins: “Information theory has, in the last few years,
become something of a scientific bandwagon. Starting as a technical
tool for the communication engineer, it has received an extraordinary
amount of publicity in the popular as well as the scientific press.”
Shannon allowed that the popularity was, at least in part, due to
information theory’s hovering place on the edges of so many of the
era’s

hottest

fields—“computing

machines,

cybernetics,

and

automation”—as well as to its sheer novelty.
And yet, he continued, “it has perhaps been ballooned to an
importance beyond its actual accomplishments. Our fellow scientists
in many different fields, attracted by the fanfare and by the new
avenues opened to scientific analysis, are using these ideas in their
own problems. . . . In short, information theory is currently partaking
of a somewhat heady draught of general popularity.” Shannon was

willing to concede that all of the momentary attention was “pleasant
and exciting.” Still,
it carries at the same time an element of danger. While we feel
that information theory is indeed a valuable tool in providing
fundamental insights into the nature of communication
problems and will continue to grow in importance, it is certainly
no panacea for the communication engineer or, a fortiori, for
anyone else. Seldom do more than a few of nature’s secrets give
way at one time.
Seldom do more than a few of nature’s secrets give way at one time.
It’s a remarkable statement from someone who still had a full career
ahead of him, someone who, in a practical sense, had every incentive
to encourage information theory’s inflation. Yet here was Shannon
pulling on the reins. He continued: “It will be all too easy for our
somewhat artificial prosperity to collapse overnight when it is realized
that the use of a few exciting words like information, entropy,
redundancy, do not solve all our problems.”
In place of all this feverish excitement, Shannon counseled
moderation:
Workers in other fields should realize that the basic results of
the subject are aimed in a very specific direction, a direction
that is not necessarily relevant to such fields as psychology,
economics, and other social sciences. Indeed, the hard core of
information theory is, essentially, a branch of mathematics, a

strictly deductive system. . . . I personally believe that many of
the concepts of information theory will prove useful in these
other fields—and, indeed, some results are already quite
promising—but the establishing of such applications is not a
trivial matter of translating words to a new domain, but rather
the slow tedious process of hypothesis and experimental
verification.
Above all, he advised his colleagues that
we must keep our own house in first class order. The subject of
information theory has certainly been sold, if not oversold. We
should now turn our attention to the business of research and
development at the highest scientific plane we can maintain.
Research rather than exposition is the keynote, and our critical
thresholds should be raised. Authors should submit only their
best efforts, and these only after careful criticism by themselves
and their colleagues. A few first rate research papers are
preferable to a large number that are poorly conceived or halffinished. The latter are no credit to their writers and a waste of
time to their reader.
The editorial, and others that agreed with Shannon’s position, had
the intended effect. Robert Gallager offered this observation about
Shannon’s approach to conflict: “Claude Shannon was a very gentle
person who believed in each person’s right to follow his or her own
path. If someone said something particularly foolish in a conversation,

Shannon had a talent for making a reasonable reply without making
the person appear foolish.” Given that habitual restraint, the
“Bandwagon” editorial was a telling statement. That he was moved to
write such a piece showed his true depth of concern over the use and
abuse of information theory—and his worries that, instead of birthing
a new field of science, he had only inflated a speculative bubble.
Betty Shannon confessed that Shannon was perhaps more
frustrated than even the editorial let on: “He got a little irritated with
the way people were pulling it around. People didn’t understand what
he was trying to do.” Robert Fano would go further, citing his own
frustration as well as Shannon’s: “I didn’t like the term Information
Theory. Claude didn’t like it either. You see, the term ‘information
theory’ suggests that it is a theory about information—but it’s not. It’s
the transmission of information, not information. Lots of people just
didn’t understand this.”
For Shannon, useful, informed applications of information theory
were always welcome. But claims for its hyperimportance—attempts
to position it as the century’s Key to All Mythologies—invariably
rested on the kinds of airy generalities and lazy philosophizing that he
scorned. Here was the real danger: that the ideas he had set in motion
might become so diffuse so as to lose all meaning. That danger is,
perhaps, a risk inherent to any revolution in scientific thought. But
Shannon felt compelled to do his part to ward it off. His work had
opened

a

theoretical

and

metaphorical

Pandora’s

box.

“The

Bandwagon” was his attempt to shut the lid, discipline the discipline,

and remind at least the engineering world that the theory he had
pioneered—and the work that had made him famous—could only
remain meaningful within its own proper bounds.

22
“We Urgently Need the Assistance of Dr.
Claude E. Shannon”
Dear Dr. Kelly,” the letter began, “although I am well aware of the
patriotic contribution which you and your Company are already
making in solving the many problems presented to you by the United
States Government, I must make a personal request of you in a matter
of the most urgent concern and importance to the security of the
United States.” Typed on official Central Intelligence Agency
letterhead and delivered to the head of Bell Labs, the message was
deliberately vague:
In attempting to find a solution to an especially vital problem
confronting us at this time, we urgently need the assistance of
Dr. Claude E. Shannon of your Company who, we are informed
on the best authority, is the most eminently qualified scientist
in the particular field concerned. . . . If his services could be
made available for this purpose on a basis satisfactory to both

you and Dr. Shannon, I will be deeply grateful. I fully realize that
even his temporary absence will be a great inconvenience to
your organization and you may be sure that only the most
compelling reason would cause me to make this request.
The writer of the letter was one of the most distinguished military
men of his era: Walter Bedell Smith, the CIA director, former Army
chief of staff to Dwight Eisenhower, and former ambassador to the
Soviet Union. He was also the fourth person to lead the CIA, a job
that, at that time, held little of the public profile it does now. Three
days later, a copy of the same letter was sent from Kingman Douglass
to Captain Joseph Wenger of the U.S. Navy, with a small attachment.
“I hope very much this letter will succeed in its purpose.” Shannon’s
past work offers some indication of what the CIA was after, but the
fact that Douglass and Wenger were involved makes it even clearer.
Kingman Douglass was one of the sons of the upper crust whose
life was a mix of prestigious private schools, paneled boardrooms, and
pressurized war rooms. A graduate of the Hill School and Yale
University, he flew planes in World War I and ran intelligence
operations in World War II. He also served on two separate occasions
with the CIA, including as assistant director for current intelligence.
Joseph Wenger also spent his career in the highest echelons of the
intelligence world. “One of the first naval officers to realize the role of
communications intelligence,” he was a U.S. Naval Academy graduate
who would rise to become a rear admiral—and along the way would
transform the way the Navy thought about and implemented

cryptologic operations, becoming “one of the architects of centralized
cryptology.” In the Pacific Theater of World War II, he found that the
close study of Japan’s “message externals,” or seemingly trivial details
ranging from call signs to communication habits, could be as
cryptographically fruitful as the analysis of the messages themselves.
By 1949, with two wars’ worth of experience and understanding, he
was a leader in the Armed Forces Security Agency (AFSA), the
forerunner to the modern NSA.
In a call with Shannon, Wenger made the case that the intelligence
community needed his help. Wenger relayed the results to Douglass in
a barely legible note: “I spoke to Shannon today on the phone and he
appeared open to persuasion. He said he would reserve judgment until
he could learn more of the problem and determine whether or not it is
something he felt he could contribute. I offered to send an emissary
to explain better to him as soon as his clearance is O.K.” John von
Neumann also contacted Shannon that week, impressing upon him
the significance of the request. It was very much in keeping with
Shannon’s sensibility that he was neither overawed by being sought
out for such a consultancy nor too quick to jump at the problem
before knowing its full scope.
A week after the letter from CIA director Smith, Wenger and
Douglas received a response from Bell Labs’ Mervin Kelly:
While there have been several other approaches to enlist
Dr. Shannon’s services in connection with military activities and
it has been our judgment that, in general, he could best

contribute in his particular field by carrying on his researches
independently, the matter with which your letter deals is of a
more compelling nature and we shall, therefore, be glad to
encourage and assist Dr. Shannon in participating to the extent
of the preliminary examination you suggest.
This note sums up Shannon’s life in the early 1950s. Applications
of information theory had mushroomed. The demands on his time
had multiplied, and Shannon was doing his level best to keep the
hordes at bay. When his resistance failed, it was almost always
because of forces outside his control. Shannon made a principle of
indifference; it was central to a career in which he chased his
instincts, often at the expense of more prestigious or remunerative
options. But his work on information theory had brought him national
renown. And now, the federal government was asking for him by
name.

The war’s end had brought the military a thorny problem: the exit
from public service of many of the nation’s top scientists,
mathematicians, and engineers. Beginning in wartime, as Sylvia Nasar
wrote, “to be plucked from academe and initiated into the secret
world of the military had become something of a rite of passage for
the mathematical elite.” Now, though, “how to keep the best and
brightest thinking about military problems was far from obvious. Men
of the caliber of John von Neumann would hardly sign up for the civil

service.” One solution, familiar to the men who occupied the upper
rungs of the mathematical world, was the establishment of technical
committees in close contact with various branches of the defense
establishment. The committee that would become most familiar to
Shannon—and the reason for the urgent messages from Wenger and
von Neumann—was known as the Special Cryptologic Advisory
Group, or SCAG.
In the NSA’s words, “the fundamental purpose in establishing
SCAG was to assemble a specific group of outstanding technical
consultants in the scientific fields of interest to the Agency, and thus
provide a valuable source of advice and assistance in solving special
problems in the cryptologic field.” Like most groups of this kind,
SCAG was a means to a host of ends. There were knotty technical
problems on which real, practical advice was sought. Committee
members served as de facto headhunters, finding and sourcing talent
at the request of senior government officials. There were frank
exchanges about the nation’s readiness on a number of fronts. The
first meeting of SCAG included sessions on the value and importance
of communications intelligence, on a case study of a complex
intelligence problem from World War II, on the state and purpose of
the intelligence bureaucracy itself, and on an AFSA project codenamed SWEATER. The committee’s concern ran the gamut from the
technical to the philosophical.
From the time he was asked to serve in 1951 until the mid-1950s,
Shannon made regular trips to Washington, D.C., for these meetings,

serving on SCAG and its successor committee, the National Security
Scientific Advisory Board. These meetings were multi-day affairs, and
each day featured dawn-to-dusk sessions with the nation’s top brass
discussing their most urgent intelligence dilemmas. “Because a
considerable portion of each agenda had to be devoted to briefings by
NSA officials before the Board could get to the consideration of
Agency problems, it was of the utmost importance that the agenda
contain the problems thought to be most pressing.” There was
another practical reason that only the most pressing problems were
brought to SCAG: these were men whose schedules were notoriously
hard to align. In fact, a substantial measure of the record available to
us about SCAG and other such committees concerns the challenge of
herding about a dozen men of the highest scientific accomplishment
into one room at the same time.
Boards of this kind were, by design, hamstrung. In the NSA
historian’s own words, “Lacking accessible, secure areas, some of the
advisors were handicapped by their inability to hold and consult
cryptologic documents between meetings, and thus to live more or
less with a problem. They could not benefit from the intuitive
concepts that come with prolonged, even if intermittent, attention.”
But the boards at least served the purpose of keeping the NSA
leadership broadly connected with the scientific world.
The leadership with which Shannon was interacting had come of
age in the midst of two massive intelligence failures. The horror of
Pearl Harbor was seared in their memories. More recently, the

invasion of South Korea by North Korea had again blindsided
American policy makers, and by 1950, the country was again on a war
footing. Which is all to say that Shannon was speaking with and
working for men who had seen armed combat and were sending a new
generation of Americans into another bloody conflict. The stakes
were real; the intelligence requirements were manifold. Mathematical
thinkers of Shannon’s and Von Neumann’s caliber were a necessary
external measure of the defense establishment’s technological and
scientific soundness.

It’s only from recently declassified documents that we get even
this vague sense of Shannon’s work for the government during this
time, and still many of the salient details remain classified. Shannon
himself was cagey about what he did. Decades later, in an interview
with Robert Price, he ducked the questions:
PRICE: And you were on the board of the NSA, weren’t you for a

while?
SHANNON: I don’t think I was on the board. I might have been a

member. I don’t think I was that . . . elevated a position.
PRICE: Well, you had dealings with the National Security Agency

at some time I’ve been told.
SHANNON: Yes, that’s a better way to put it. . . . I got involved in

cryptography at a later period. I was a consultant. I probably
should . . . I don’t know . . .

PRICE:

You’re talking about NSA now, probably the Advisory

Board?
SHANNON: Well, I was invited . . . I think, I don’t know that I have

any . . . even though this was a long time ago, I’d better not
talk about. . . .
To some extent, this is classic Shannon: immune to self-puffery,
unwilling to dive into topics that held limited interest. But Shannon
tended to parry questions of this sort with a wry mix of sarcasm and
humor. That he was nervous and halting in this exchange says a great
deal about the secrecy surrounding the work he did.
Shannon had reason to be guarded: he had exposure to some of the
nation’s most closely held secrets and systems and came into contact
with the founding fathers and texts of the national security state. He
understood both the gravity of the work and the need to keep the
privileged information secret. This was no idle matter. One of
Shannon’s fellow NSA scientific advisers, John von Neumann, was
watched round-the-clock by uniformed military personnel when he
was on his deathbed at the Army’s Walter Reed Hospital. Impressive
though von Neumann’s mind may have been, it wasn’t immune from
infiltration—or so the government feared. And what better time to
infiltrate it—and grab the precious state secrets it held—than when it
was in a medically induced haze?

23
The Man-Machines

Could a machine think?—Could it be in pain?—Well, is the human
body to be called such a machine? It surely comes as close as
possible to being such a machine. But a machine surely cannot
think!—Is that an empirical statement? No. We only say of a
human being and what is like one that it thinks. We also say it of
dolls and no doubt of spirits too.
—Ludwig Wittgenstein

I’m a machine and you’re a machine, and we both think, don’t we?
—Claude Shannon

If Shannon had peculiar work habits before the publication of his
information theory, his growing reputation granted him the license to
indulge those peculiarities without reservation. After 1948, the Bell
Labs bureaucracy could not touch him—which was precisely as
Shannon preferred it. Henry Pollak, director of Bell Labs’ Mathematics
Division, spoke for a generation of Bell leaders when he declared that

Shannon “had earned the right to be non-productive.” Shannon
arrived at the Murray Hill office late, if at all, and often spent the day
absorbed in games of chess and hex in the common areas. When not
besting his colleagues in board games, he could be found piloting a
unicycle through Bell Labs’ narrow passageways, occasionally while
juggling; sometimes he would pogo-stick his way around the Bell Labs
campus, much to the consternation, we imagine, of the people who
signed his paychecks.
Colleagues may have bristled at all this, but Shannon was, by this
point, a legend masquerading as an ordinary employee. He had
engineered as close to an emeritus role for himself as he could under
the contractual obligations of full-time employment. That meant
being able to work with his door closed, practically a sin in Bell Labs
circles. It also meant pursuing personal projects to whatever
conclusion suited him. One receipt from this time records a series of
hardware store purchases that he billed to the Labs, presumably part
of a machine Shannon was building, the result of which could hardly
have mattered to the practical work of the phone company.
But none of this was cause for alarm within Bell Labs. There was no
doubting the quality of Shannon’s mind, and thus no one thought to
ask rigorous questions about how he was keeping it occupied. After
all, the “founder of information theory” had, essentially, dropped the
theory into everyone’s laps after finishing it in private. Who was to
question what else he might be up to behind closed doors?

One curious side effect of all this freedom: Shannon became,
during this period, an inconsistent correspondent, even as the volume
of his correspondence began to grow with his reputation. Letters went
unanswered for long stretches, so many and for so long that Shannon
collected them all in a folder labeled “Letters I’ve procrastinated in
answering for too long.” In the words of Jon Gertner, “it seemed lost
on Shannon that the scientist who had declared that any message
could be sent through any noisy channel with almost perfect fidelity
was now himself a proven exception. Transmissions could reach
Claude Shannon. But then they would fail to go any further.”
These weren’t all anonymous fans and unknown admirers, either.
Shannon received correspondence from eminent scientists, high-level
government officials—and even L. Ron Hubbard.
It’s only with the benefit of several decades that we can judge this
to be one of the stranger correspondences in Shannon’s life. It’s worth
being emphatic on one point: yes, the founder of dianetics and the
Church of Scientology sought Shannon out. No, Shannon was not a
Scientologist himself. Hubbard, it appears, was more interested in
Shannon than Shannon was in Hubbard. Shannon, for his part, wrote
a letter to Warren McCulloch, a leading cybernetics researcher at MIT,
asking if McCulloch would meet with his “friend” Hubbard.
Hubbard, it seems, was better known to Shannon as an author of
space operas than as a budding religious crackpot. “If you read Science
Fiction as avidly as I do you’ll recognize him as one of the best writers
in that field,” Shannon writes. “Hubbard is also an expert hypnotist

and has been doing some very interesting work lately in using a
modified hypnotic technique for therapeutic purposes. . . . I am sure
you’ll find Ron a very interesting person, with a career about as varied
as your own, whether or not his treatment contains anything
of value.”
Hubbard would later write to Shannon thanking him for help on his
research and promising a copy of Dianetics when it was released. No
further correspondence between the founder of information theory
and the pope of Scientology has been recorded. Yet, as William
Poundstone notes, “to this day Hubbard’s Scientology faith cites
Shannon and information theoretic jargon in its literature and web
sites.”
The correspondence with Hubbard was positively staid in
comparison with many of the other letters that piled up on Shannon’s
desk. Alongside the usual traffic of scientific colleagues reaching out
for a paper or a book review, there was also a steady stream of cranks
who sought out Shannon’s approval for their private researches, or
whose paranoia about the phone company led them to contact one of
its prominent faces. One handwritten letter began, “Dear Dr. Shannon,
I am enclosing a ‘Theory of Space.’ I have sent it to several other
eminent scientists but thus far have not received a reply. . . . ” A letter
from the self-identified “IDEA MAN” requested Shannon’s assistance
“to complete and verify a 15 year search to locate and exactness OF
life, mind, and energy.”
Another was more menacing:

Dear Sir, Your mechanical robot Bel, the idol in the Bible, is a
mechanical

monstrosity.

Your

robot

is

breaking

five

amendments of the Constitution (1, 3, 4, 5, + 13th). God admits
that I am laughing at you. You are making a traitor out of the
President of the U.S. And the F.B.I. By letting your robot deceive
you. I have threatened to sue the NY Telephone Co. Of NY City,
and I will, if you don’t wake up.
Shannon was good-natured about it all—able to use his charm to
defuse tough inquiries, or more often, to ignore them without a
second thought. Unlike many scientists who parlayed successful
research careers into lives as public intellectuals, he did not seem to
consider using his growing standing within the world of science as an
opportunity to expand his network outside of it. Nor did he take it as
a responsibility to opine on policy or act as a public educator. If
anything, he closed himself off further, ignoring letters, colleagues,
and projects, and spending his time and attention absorbed by the
puzzles that interested him most. Shannon had earned this right—
information theory was painstaking work—and he found himself
drawn now to new problems and fresh horizons, including some that
seemed, to colleagues, borderline ridiculous for someone of Shannon’s
stature.

“I think the history of science has shown that valuable
consequences often proliferate from simple curiosity,” Shannon once

remarked. Curiosity in extremis runs the risk of becoming
dilettantism, a tendency to sample everything and finish nothing. But
Shannon’s curiosity was different. His kind meant asking a question
and then constructing—usually, with his hands—a plausible answer.
Could a robotic mouse navigate its way through a maze? Build one and
find out. Could a machine turn itself off? Make one that is trained to
commit technological hara-kiri. What other people called hobbies, he
thought of as experiments: exercises in the practice of simplification,
models that filed a problem down to its barest interesting form. He
was so convinced of a machine-enabled future, and so eager to explore
its boundaries, that he was willing to tolerate a degree of ridicule to
bring it to pass. He was preoccupied, as he wrote to a correspondent,
“with the possible capabilities and applications of large scale
electronic computers.” Considered in the light of that future, our
present, his machines weren’t hobbies—they were proofs.
One starting point for all of this tinkering with mechanics was
benign: a wife’s Christmas gift. “I went out and got him the biggest
Erector set you could buy in America. It was fifty bucks and everyone
thought I was insane!” Betty Shannon later told an interviewer. Claude
Shannon added: “Giving it to a grown man! But the fact of the matter
is that it was extremely useful and I used it to try out different
things.” And like a child with a new present, Shannon became
obsessed: the basement became a mess of loose erector parts, and he
stayed up late into the night, building away.

The first idea was a dry run: a mechanical turtle that stalked the
Shannon house, bumping into the walls and turning around only to
bump into a different wall. But the hapless turtle anticipated the next
invention, the one that would, unexpectedly, attract national
attention: Theseus, the maze-solving mouse. As one report had it, the
idea for a mechanical mouse that could navigate a maze grew out of
Shannon’s attempt to escape the famous garden maze at London’s
Hampton Court Palace. It took him twenty minutes; he figured it
could be done faster. Later, the most famous photo of Claude
Shannon would depict him with a finished Theseus and the maze,
Shannon’s hand setting the mouse down within the walls. It was
named, somewhat optimistically, for the Greek hero who slew the
Minotaur and escaped the fearsome Labyrinth; but for now it was a
three-inch piece of wood with copper whiskers and three wheels.
It was Shannon’s research on switching, and his work for the
telephone company, that inspired the guts of the contraption.
Seventy-five electromechanical relays, the sort used as switches in
the phone system to connect one call to another, toggled like railroad
tracks shifting trains to allow the mouse to navigate. Betty completed
the wiring for the earliest prototype. “We did all this at home at night
after work,” she said.
Theseus was propelled by a pair of magnets, one embedded in its
hollow core, and one moving freely beneath the maze. The mouse
would begin its course, bump into a wall, sense that it had hit an
obstacle with its “whiskers,” activate the right relay to attempt a new

path, and then repeat the process until it hit its goal, a metallic piece
of cheese. The relays stored the directions of the right path in
“memory”: once the mouse had successfully navigated the maze by
trial and error, it could find the cheese a second time with ease.
Appearances to the contrary, Theseus the mouse was mainly the
passive part of the endeavor: the underlying maze itself held the
information and propelled Theseus with its magnet. Technically, as
Shannon would point out, the mouse wasn’t solving the maze; the
maze was solving the mouse. Yet, one way or another, the system was
able to learn.
When it arrived at Murray Hill, Theseus became a minor Bell Labs
celebrity. The mouse earned Shannon and the Labs a patent. The Labs
also commissioned a short film starring Shannon and Theseus. The
seven-minute short was produced with the general public in
mind.Shannon, nattily dressed in a dark suit with a light red tie,
explains the maze-solving mouse and its mechanisms in the
deliberate, step-by-step manner of a college professor. “Hello,” he
begins, “I’m Claude Shannon, a mathematician here at the Bell
Laboratories.” He dives in, explaining both what the viewer is
watching—the mouse making its way through a maze—and what
underlies the system. When it comes to extending the analogy of the
mouse and maze further than what’s in front of him, Shannon only
hints at it, only gestures in the direction of what Theseus means for
the possibilities of a robot brain:

Of course, solving a problem and remembering the solution
involves a certain level of mental activity, something akin,
perhaps, to a brain. A small computing machine serves Theseus
for a brain. . . . We have placed the brain cells of Theseus, if you
like, behind a small mirror here.
Shannon explains that Theseus’s brain is something more basic and
familiar, something akin to the system that powers the telephone’s
elaborate network of switches and wires. “Here at the Bell Telephone
Laboratories, we’re concerned with improving your telephone
system,” Shannon says, coming the closest he ever will come to
shilling for his employer. That moment, along with the images of
telephones dialing and switches activating, and the cheery music in
the background, was a necessary piece of PR: concerned as they were
about regulatory interest in their work, the higher-ups at Bell Labs
and AT&T couldn’t allow Claude Shannon to go into theaters, schools,
or universities with a robotic mouse and risk giving the appearance
that the enormous leeway and profits they had been granted by the
U.S. government was being devoted to frivolities.
Shannon closes the video by changing the contours of the maze
and putting Theseus inside a square with no exit. “Like the rest of us,
he occasionally finds himself in a situation like this,” Shannon says, as
the mouse moves, hits a wall, moves, hits a wall, and ends up trapped.
The camera cuts to Shannon, who smirks, and the music cues the end
of the demonstration.

The outside world took an unexpected interest in Theseus, and
the celebrity it earned Shannon and Bell Labs impressed Shannon’s
bosses. One story lodged itself in Bell Labs lore. Henry Pollak
recounted what happened when Shannon gave a demonstration of
Theseus for the AT&T board of directors:
I was told that one of the board members at the end of the
presentation said, “Now that’s the kind of original thinking we
need at AT&T! I propose that Claude Shannon be made a
member of the board!” And they had a hell of a time dissuading
this guy from the idea of making Claude Shannon a board
member, and they finally got around it by the fact that Claude
Shannon did not own enough shares of stock to be made a board
member.
Time magazine featured Theseus in a short article: “Mouse with a
Memory.” Life published a photo of Theseus finding the cheese.
Popular Science ran a three-page spread under the headline “This
Mouse Is Smarter Than You Are.” Theseus found its way into more
serious quarters, as well. The mechanical mouse was a featured
subject of discussion at the famed 1951 Macy Conference, an
interdisciplinary meeting of scientists and scholars in New York.
Shannon was in attendance along with many of the leading
authorities on artificial intelligence and computing, as well as the
anthropologist Margaret Mead. The incongruity of such leading minds
discussing a mechanical mouse was mitigated by the fact that Theseus

(or, to be exact, the mouse-maze system as a whole) was a working
example of the “artificial intelligence” that many of the esteemed
attendees had spent their careers pondering only in theory. Theseus
was artificially intelligent. When an attendee pointed out the obvious
—that if the metallic cheese were removed, the mouse would simply
sputter along, searching in vain for a piece of cheese that was no
longer there—conference attendee and social scientist Larry Frank
responded, “It is all too human.”
In the end, the editors of the conference proceedings offered a
skeptical assessment of Theseus (in the process demoting him,
perhaps unconsciously, from “mouse” to “rat”):
The fascination of watching Shannon’s innocent rat negotiate
its maze does not derive from any obvious similarity between
the machine and a real rat; they are, in fact, rather dissimilar.
The mechanics, however, is strikingly similar to the notions held
by certain learning theorists about rats and about organisms in
general.
In other words, Theseus was not a real intelligence, but he did
model one aspect of how a rat or any other another creature might
learn. If Shannon indulged in a good-natured eye roll, it is not
recorded.
Shannon would later tell a former teacher of his that Theseus had
been “a demonstration device to make vivid the ability of a machine
to solve, by trial and error, a problem, and remember the solution.” To

the question of whether a certain rough kind of intelligence could be
“created,” Shannon had offered an answer: yes, it could. Machines
could learn. They could, in the circumscribed way Shannon had
demonstrated, make mistakes, discover alternatives, and avoid the
same missteps again. Learning and memory could be programmed and
plotted, the script written into a device that looked, from a certain
perspective, like an extremely simple precursor of a brain. The idea
that machines could imitate humans was nothing new. But Theseus
had made that idea—and the promise that a machine could memorize
and deduce—seem vividly real.

Over the years, Shannon’s thinking and nonthinking machines
took on a range of shapes and styles. Some served as an oblique social
commentary: the “Ultimate Machine,” when its single switch was
flipped, would reach out a mechanical hand and turn itself off.
THROBAC (“Thrifty Roman-Numeral Backward-Looking Computer”)
was a calculator whose keys, processing, and output all worked in
Roman numerals, useless except to those who could decipher the
difference between, say, CLXII and CXLII. These gadgets had the
character of sly, private jokes. But Shannon also placed a high value
on his tinkering. “The design of game playing machines may seem at
first an entertaining pastime rather than a serious scientific study,” he
allowed, but there was “a serious side and significant purpose to such
work, and at least four or five universities and research laboratories
have instituted projects along this line.”

His goals were as grand as the means, at least at the time, were
simple. “My fondest dream is to someday build a machine that really
thinks, learns, communicates with humans and manipulates its
environment in a fairly sophisticated way,” Shannon admitted. But he
was not bothered by the usual fears of a world run by machines or a
human race taking a backseat to robots. If anything, Shannon believed
the opposite: “In the long run [the machines] will be a boon to
humanity, and the point is to make them so as rapidly as possible. . . .
There is much greater empathy between man and machines [today] . . .
we’d like to close it up so that we are actually talking back and forth.”
That quote, and several of the anecdotes that followed Shannon
until the end of his life, originated in a now largely forgotten profile of
Shannon in Vogue magazine, titled “The Man-Machines May Talk First
to Dr. Shannon.” As a part of the profile, Shannon spoke at length
with writer Brock Brewer about the connection between automata and
their creators. (And as it was a feature for Vogue, and not, say,
Scientific American, Shannon was expected to endure a photo shoot,
with the renowned Henri Cartier-Bresson behind the lens. It put
Shannon in illustrious company: Cartier-Bresson’s other shoots
included Mahatma Gandhi’s funeral, Queen Elizabeth’s coronation,
and the first several months of Mao Zedong’s ascendance.)
The piece opened with what, at the time, must have seemed the
musings of a madman: “Dr. Claude E. Shannon . . . who creates, plays
with, stays a think ahead of thinking machines, looks forward to man
and machine talking back and forth. For him, why not?” For Shannon,

the prospect of artificial intelligence was a tangible reality, not a
futuristic fantasy. Imagining how “computer-controlled exploratory
robots” would handle accidentally falling into a hole on the moon (and
anticipating the Roomba in the process), he said,
you have to think of problems like this when machines are
running around loose in the real world. A machine on the moon
must protect itself—not fall down a hole, without your having to
tell it not to. It’s the same problem we’re going to have some day
with furniture when there are robot housekeepers running
around the house, picking up things.
Shannon was happily oblivious to fears of exponentially expanding
artificial intelligence, of robots begetting ever-more-advanced robots
and putting the human race at risk. In fact, his was a thoroughly
optimistic vision of technological progress—one in which machines
ought

to

be

given

increasing

abilities,

responsibilities,

and

information. In response to the question of what the point of all his
robot work might be, Shannon remarked that his goals were threefold:
“First, how can we give computers a better sensory knowledge of the
real world? Second, how can they better tell us what they know,
besides printing out the information? And third, how can we get them
to react upon the real world?”
Or, as he told a later interviewer, in an even more optimistic mood:
I believe that today, that we are going to invent something, it’s
not going to be the biological process of evolution anymore, it’s

going to be the inventive process whereby we invent machines
which are smarter than we are and so we’re no longer useful, not
only smarter but they last longer and have replaceable parts and
they’re so much better. There are so many of these things about
the human system, it’s just terrible. The only thing surgeons can
do to help you basically is to cut something out of you. They
don’t cut it out and put something better in, or a new part in.
In fact, when it came to human superiority over machines,
“thinking is sort of the last thing to be putting up a fight.” While
Shannon did not expect a computer to pass the famous, and famously
open-ended, Turing Test—a machine indistinguishably mimicking a
human—within his lifetime, in 1984 he did propose a set of more
discrete goals for artificial intelligence. Computer scientists might, by
2001, hope to have created a chess-playing program that was crowned
world champion, a poetry program that had a piece accepted by the
New Yorker, a mathematical program that proved the elusive Riemann
hypothesis, and, “most important,” a stock-picking program that
outperformed the prime rate by 50 percent. He was about half right: a
computer did defeat the world chess champion in 1997, four years
before Shannon’s deadline, and computers do conduct the bulk of the
world’s stock trading.
Yet there were moods in which Shannon’s cheeriness over the
future of machines curdled into misanthropy. “We artificial
intelligence people are insatiable,” he once wrote. Once machines
were beating our grandmasters, writing our poetry, completing our

mathematical proofs, and managing our money, we would, Shannon
observed only half-jokingly, be primed for extinction. “These goals
could mark the beginning of a phase-out of the stupid, entropyincreasing, and militant human race in favor of a more logical, energy
conserving, and friendly species—the computer.”

24
The Game of Kings
The crowd at Philadelphia’s Masonic Hall may have heard rumors of
the mysterious machine that had the ability to play chess, but the day
after Christmas of 1826 was, for most, the first time they would see
the “Chess Playing Automaton” in the flesh. Johann Maelzel, a
showman par excellence, took the stage and directed the attention of
the audience to the machine by his side: a box about the size of an
executive desk, with a mannequin emerging from the top, dressed in
robes and a turban in the style of “an oriental sorcerer.”
With theatrical flourish, Maelzel opened the side door to “The
Turk,” revealing gears and gadgetry. By the time the machine had
checkmated its first opponent, the crowd was astounded. Silas Weir
Mitchell, the eminent physician and writer, was moved to observer
that “the Turk—even he, with his oriental silence and rolling eyes,
would haunt your nightly visions for many an evening after. Since
then we have known him better, and we confess to this day a certain
mysterious awe of his eternal cross-leggedness, his turbaned front,

and left-handed activity.” In that face of that, sorcery seemed a
plausible explanation.
The only sorcery, though, was how Maelzel managed to get away
with it. The Turk was a hoax: inside the elaborately designed device,
behind the gears and pulleys, was a human chess player, navigating
each game like a puppeteer. Some of the era’s greatest chess players
would power the Turk, and yet its secret remained hidden from the
public for several decades. Edgar Allan Poe, among others, was
prescient enough to investigate the phenomenon, fixing his suspicion
on one of the Turk’s handlers “who is never to be seen during the
exhibition of the Chess Player, although frequently visible just before
and just after.”
But Poe’s skepticism was a minority opinion, and for much of the
century it was believed that the machine was just as good—and
terrifying—as advertised. The Turk tapped into an anxiety as
persistent as it was powerful. Before the legend of John Henry and the
fear of a machine to surpass man’s might, before science fiction
imagined artificial intelligence or the singularity, there was the Turk, a
machine that claimed to surpass its creators. Of course, the Turk was
a hoax; but the hoax was only a reprieve.

If Shannon was cheerfully optimistic about the possibilities of
thinking machines, it wasn’t only because he had built a mechanized
mouse that could find its way through a maze to a piece of steel
cheese—and remember its path. It was also because, in the late 1940s

and early 1950s, he turned his curiosity to the question of how and
whether a computer might be programmed to compete against a
human being in a chess match. It didn’t matter that the recent history
of such machines was a story of hucksters; Shannon believed it was
possible for a computer to play honestly, and to play better than a
human. What this research gave Shannon was yet more assurance
that a properly programmed machine could do more than mimic a
human brain—it could best it.
In a life of pursuits adopted and discarded with the ebb and flow of
Shannon’s promiscuous curiosity, chess remained one of his few
lifelong pastimes. One story has it that Shannon played so much
chess at Bell Labs that “at least one supervisor became somewhat
worried.” He had a gift for the game, and as word of his talent spread
throughout the Labs, many would try their hand at beating him. “Most
of us didn’t play more than once against him,” recalled Brockway
McMillan.
On a trip to Russia in 1965, Shannon offered a friendly game to
Soviet international grandmaster and three-time world champion
Mikhail Botvinnik. Botvinnik, having presumably endured countless
games of show for various dignitaries, agreed to the match but played
without paying much attention and nursed a cigarette throughout, his
uninterest apparent to all in the room. Then, suddenly, Shannon
managed to win the favorable exchange of his knight and a pawn for
Botvinnik’s rook early in the contest. Botvinnik’s attention was
instantly yanked back to the board, and the atmosphere of the room

shifted as the Russian champion realized that his challenger was more
than just another hapless dignitary. “Botvinnik was worried,” Betty
would remember years later.
The game went on far longer than anyone, including the surprised
champion, could have predicted. But there was still no real doubt
about the outcome. After forty-two moves, Shannon tipped his king
over, conceding the match. Still, lasting dozens of moves against
Botvinnik, considered among the most gifted chess players of all time,
earned Shannon lifelong bragging rights.
(Another incident from the same trip to Russia spoke to his and
Betty’s sense of humor. When Shannon complained aloud that the
lock on their hotel room’s door was broken, a locksmith instantly
appeared—leading them to suspect that their room had been bugged
by the Soviet authorities. Their next move was to complain aloud that
they had never received the royalties for the Russian edition of his
book—and a check materialized the next day.)

His work on computerized chess would, in time, be recognized as
another instance of Shannon dropping into a field and, in one stroke,
defining its limits and unearthing many of its central possibilities.
Decades after the publication of his paper “Programming a Computer
for Playing Chess,” Byte magazine would put it succinctly: “There have
been few new ideas in computer chess since Claude Shannon.” The
paper that would bring the world a significant step closer to an actual,
working Turk attracted none of the hoax’s audience or attention.

Shannon introduced his idea for a chess-playing computer with
characteristic modesty: “Although perhaps of no practical importance,
the question is of theoretical interest, and it is hoped that a
satisfactory solution of this problem will act as a wedge in attacking
other problems of a similar nature and of greater significance.”
Shannon imagined some future applications of a chess-playing
artificial intelligence: routing phone calls, translating text, composing
melodies. As he reminded his readers, these machines were right
around the technological corner, and no one doubted their economic
utility. As diverse as these applications were, they had an important
quality in common: they didn’t operate according to a “strict,
unalterable computing process.” Rather, “solutions of these problems
are not merely right or wrong but have a continuous range of
‘quality.’ ” In this way, chess was a valuable test case for the emerging
generation of artificial intelligence.
Nearly a half century before Deep Blue defeated the world’s human
champion, Shannon anticipated the value of chess as a sort of training
ground for intelligent machines and their makers:
The chess machine is an ideal one to start with, since: (1) the
problem is sharply defined both in allowed operations (the
moves) and in the ultimate goal (checkmate); (2) it is neither so
simple as to be trivial nor too difficult for satisfactory solution;
(3) chess is generally considered to require “thinking” for skillful
play; a solution of this problem will force us either to admit the
possibility of a mechanized thinking or to further restrict our

concept of “thinking”; (4) the discrete structure of chess fits well
into the digital nature of modern computers.
Shannon believed that, at least within the realm of chess, the
inanimate had certain intrinsic advantages. The obvious ones were
processing speeds well beyond the human brain and an endless
capacity for computation. Further, an artificial intelligence wouldn’t
be susceptible to boredom or exhaustion; it could continue to drill
into a chess position well after its human counterpart had lost
concentration. Computers were, in Shannon’s view, blessed with
“freedom from errors,” their only mistakes “due to deficiencies of the
program while human players are continually guilty of very simple
and obvious blunders.” This extended to errors of the psyche:
computers couldn’t suffer from a case of nerves or overconfidence,
two deficits in human players that led to game-ending mistakes. A
robot player could play emotionless, egoless chess: a clinical game in
which each move was simply a new math problem.
But—and Shannon was emphatic about the “but”—“these must be
balanced against the flexibility, imagination and inductive and
learning capacities of the human mind.” The great downfall of a
chess-playing machine, Shannon thought, was that it couldn’t learn
on the fly, a capacity he believed was vital for victory at the elite
levels. He cites Reuben Fine, an American chess master, on the
misconceptions about top-ranked players and their approach to the
game: “Very often people have the idea that masters foresee
everything or nearly everything . . . that everything is mathematically

calculated down to the smirk when the Queen’s Rook Pawn queens
one move ahead of the opponent’s King’s Knight’s Pawn. All this is, of
course, pure fantasy. The best course to follow is to note the major
consequences for two moves, but try to work out forced variations as
they go.”
In mastering the probabilities of each conceivable position, then, a
chess computer would not simply be acting as a superpowered
grandmaster, but as a fundamentally different kind of player.
Essentially, human and computer would be playing two different
games while seated across the same board.
So Shannon cautioned against programming computers to behave
too much like human beings: “It is not being suggested that we should
design the strategy in our own image. Rather it should be matched to
the capacities and weaknesses of the computer. The computer is
strong in speed and accuracy and weak in analytical ability and
recognition.” Computers needed to be taken on their own merits and
flaws, not as ersatz humans. What followed in the paper, and what
Shannon would later popularize in a less technical article for Scientific
American, was the range of strategies that could be programmed into a
computer: a blueprint for turning a machine into a good, if not a great,
player.
It is an admittedly broad survey: he studied each move’s possible
outcomes, considered game-theoretic approaches, outlined how a
machine might go about evaluating moves, and concluded that a
computer could be programmed to play a perfect game of chess, but

that such an outcome would be wildly impractical. This was, in a way,
a limitation of the technology of the time: if a contemporary
computer’s goal were to calculate all possible moves for itself and its
opponent, it would not move its first pawn, Shannon calculated, for
1090 years.

Much as his information theory paper had done, Shannon’s
chess paper acted as a road map for an emerging field. Shannon would
live to see the fruits of these labors; he would purchase machine after
chess-playing machine, leading his exasperated wife to remark that
“Claude went hog wild.” But he took it one step further: Shannon’s
answer to Maelzel, one might say, came in the form of a machine he
built himself. Completed in 1949, the machine was referred to as both
Endgame and Caissac (after the fictional “patron goddess of chess,”
Caïssa). Shannon’s machine could only handle six pieces and focused
on the final moves in a chess game. Over 150 relay switches were used
to calculate a move, processing power that allowed the machine to
decide within a respectable ten to fifteen seconds.
The machine has largely been absent from accounts of Shannon’s
life. It is preserved at the MIT museum and in the memories of those
closest to him. The box had the pattern of a chess board engraved on
top of it; once the computer determined the correct move, a series of
lights would indicate its choice to the user.
It was, by some accounts, the world’s first chess-playing computer.
It is also, perhaps more importantly, another illustration of Shannon’s

eagerness to build with his hands what he had dreamed up on paper.
For Shannon, both the chess paper and the chess machine
addressed more enticingly ecumenical questions, as well. How should
we think about “thinking machines”? Do machines think in the way
we do? Do we want them to? What were an artificial brain’s strengths
and weaknesses? Shannon gave a measured answer, one that surely
reflected the fact that he himself hadn’t come to firm conclusions:
“From a behavioristic point of view, the machine acts as though it
were thinking. It has always been considered that skillful play
requires the reasoning faculty. If we regard thinking as a property of
external actions rather than internal method, the machine is surely
thinking.”
Shannon would, over time, grow more positive that artificial brains
would

surpass

organic

brains.

Decades

would

pass

before

programmers would build a grand-master-level chess computer on the
foundations that Shannon helped lay, but he was certain that such an
outcome was inevitable. The thought that a machine could never
exceed its creator was “just foolish logic, wrong and incorrect logic.”
He went on: “you can make a thing that is smarter than yourself.
Smartness in this game is made partly of time and speed. I can build
something which can operate much faster than my neurons.” There
was nothing more mysterious to it:
I think man is a machine. No, I am not joking, I think man is a
machine of a very complex sort, different from a computer, i.e.,
different in organization. But it could be easily reproduced—it

has about ten billion nerve cells, i.e., 1010 neurons. And if you
model each one of these with electronic equipment it will act
like a human brain. If you take [Bobby] Fischer’s head and make
a model of that, it would play like Fischer.

25
Constructive Dissatisfaction
Shannon left little behind in the way of memoir, and the closest he
ever came to autobiography was a talk he delivered in a Bell Labs
auditorium in the same year that Theseus made its public debut.
Fittingly, the talk revealed nothing of his background or his private
life, but it was the kind of autobiography that mattered to him: a
window into the workings of his brain. Ostensibly a lecture on
“Creative Thinking,” it turned out to be a tantalizingly brief tutorial on
the appearance of the world from the eyes of a Shannon-level genius.
In one sense, the world seen through such eyes looks starkly
unequal. “A very small percentage of the population produces the
greatest proportion of the important ideas,” Shannon began, gesturing
toward a rough graph of the distribution of intelligence. “There are
some people if you shoot one idea into the brain, you will get a half an
idea out. There are other people who are beyond this point at which
they produce two ideas for each idea sent in. Those are the people
beyond the knee of the curve.” He was not, he quickly added, claiming

membership for himself in the mental aristocracy—he was talking
about history’s limited supply of Newtons and Einsteins. Of course, he
was also lecturing a roomful of America’s most gifted scientists on the
prerequisites of genius, so one imagines that his humility only
extended so far. In any case, once the prerequisites of talent and
training had been satisfied, a third quality was still missing—
something without which the world would have its full share of
competent engineers but would lack even one real innovator.
It was here, naturally, that Shannon was at his fuzziest. It is a
quality of “motivation . . . some kind of desire to find out the answer,
the desire to find out what makes things tick.” For Shannon, this was
a requirement: “If you don’t have that, you may have all the training
and intelligence in the world, [but] you don’t have the questions and
you won’t just find the answers.” Yet he himself was unable to nail
down its source. As he put it, “It is a matter of temperament probably;
that is, a matter of probably early training, early childhood
experiences.” Finally, at a loss for exactly what to call it, he settled on
curiosity. “I just won’t go any deeper into it than that.”
But then the great insights don’t spring from curiosity alone, but
from dissatisfaction—not the depressive kind of dissatisfaction (of
which, he did not say, he had experienced his fair share), but rather a
“constructive dissatisfaction,” or “a slight irritation when things don’t
look quite right.” It was, at least, a refreshingly unsentimental picture
of genius: a genius is simply someone who is usefully irritated.

And finally: the genius must delight in finding solutions. It must
have seemed to Shannon that though many around him were of equal
intellect, not everyone derived equal joy from the application of
intellect. For his part, “I get a big bang out of proving a theorem. If I’ve
been trying to prove a mathematical theorem for a week or so and I
finally get the solution, I get a big bang out of it. And I get a big kick
out of seeing a clever way of doing some engineering problem, a clever
design for a circuit which uses a very small amount of equipment and
gets apparently a great deal of result out of it.” For Shannon, there
was no substitute for the “pleasure in seeing net results.”

Presuming that one was blessed with the right blend of talent,
training, curiosity, irritation, and joy, how would such a person go
about solving an actual mathematical or design problem? Here
Shannon was more concrete: he proposed six strategies, and the
fluency with which he walked his audience through them—drawing
P’s for “problems” and S’s for “solutions” on the chalkboard behind
him for emphasis—suggests that these were all well-trodden paths in
his mind.
You might, he said, start by simplifying: “Almost every problem
that you come across is befuddled with all kinds of extraneous data of
one sort or another; and if you can bring this problem down into the
main issues, you can see more clearly what you’re trying to do.” Of
course, simplification is an art form in itself: it requires a knack for
excising everything from a problem except what makes it interesting,

a nose for the distinction between accident and essence worthy of a
scholastic

philosopher.

From

the

standpoint

of

Shannon’s

information theory, for instance, the difference between a radio and a
gene is merely accidental, and yet the difference between a weighted
and an unweighted coin carries essential weight.
Failing this difficult work of simplifying, or supplementing it, you
might attempt step two: encircle your problem with existing answers
to similar questions, and then deduce what it is that the answers have
in common—in fact, if you’re a true expert, “your mental matrix will
be filled with P’s and S’s,” a vocabulary of questions already answered.
Call it ingenious incrementalism—or, as Shannon put it, “It seems to
be much easier to make two small jumps than the one big jump in any
kind of mental thinking.”
If you cannot simplify or solve via similarities, try to restate the
question: “Change the words. Change the viewpoint. . . . Break loose
from certain mental blocks which are holding you in certain ways of
looking at a problem.” Avoid “ruts of mental thinking.” In other words,
don’t become trapped by the sunk cost, the work you’ve already put
in. There’s a reason, after all, why “someone who is quite green to a
problem” will sometimes solve it on their first attempt: they are
unconstrained by the biases that build up over time.
Fourth, mathematicians have generally found that one of the most
powerful ways of changing the viewpoint is through the “structural
analysis of a problem”—that is, through breaking an overwhelming
problem into small pieces. “Many proofs in mathematics have been

actually found by extremely roundabout processes,” Shannon pointed
out. “A man starts to prove this theorem and he finds that he wanders
all over the map. He starts off and proves a good many results which
don’t seem to be leading anywhere and then eventually ends up by
the back door on the solution of the given problem.” Fifth, problems
that can’t be analyzed might still be inverted. If you can’t use your
premises to prove your conclusion, just imagine that the conclusion is
already true and see what happens—try proving the premises instead.
Finally, once you’ve found your S, by one of these methods or by any
other, take time to see how far it will stretch. The math that holds
true on the smallest levels often, it turns out, holds true on the
largest. “The typical mathematical theory is developed . . . to prove a
very isolated, special result, [a] particular theorem. Someone always
will come along and start generalizing it.” So why not do it yourself?
In each of these methods, it’s difficult to miss the echoes of
Shannon’s own work: the great simplification that turned computer
relays into a shorthand for the language of logic, or the great
generalization that identified the rules underlying every system of
communication. Yet it is one thing to put these modes of thinking
into words—and something else entirely to live inside them. Shannon
seemed to recognize as much: “I think that good research workers
apply these things unconsciously; that is, they do these things
automatically.” He went on to express his rationalist faith that any
researcher would benefit from naming the tools, from making the
unconscious conscious. But if it were really that simple, then why is it

that “a very small percentage of the population produces the greatest
proportion of the important ideas”? If there was any tension in the
auditorium when he concluded—and invited the audience up to the
front to examine a new gadget he’d been tinkering on—it was between
Shannon the reluctant company man and Shannon the solitary
wonder. The latter was as elusive as ever.
There is a famous paper on the philosophy of mind called “What Is
It Like to Be a Bat?” The answer, roughly, is that we have no idea.
What was it like to be Claude Shannon?

3

26
Professor Shannon
MIT made the first move: in 1956, the university invited one of its
most famous alumni, Claude Shannon, to spend a semester back in
Cambridge as a visiting professor. Returning to his graduate school
haunts had something of a revivifying effect on Claude, as well as
Betty. For one thing, the city of Cambridge was a bustle of activity
compared to the comparatively sleepy New Jersey suburbs. Betty
remembered it as an approximation of their Manhattan years, when
going out to lunch meant stepping into the urban whirl.
Working in academia, too, had its charms. “There is an active
structure of university life that tends to overcome monotony and
boredom,” wrote Shannon. “The new classes, the vacations, the
various academic exercises add considerable variety to the life here.”
Reading those impersonal lines, one might miss the implication that
Shannon himself had grown bored.
The work of teaching turned out to be a surprisingly pleasant
change. A note from Shannon to a Bell Labs colleague gives a window

into his new life as a professor:
I am having a very enjoyable time here at MIT. The seminar is
going very well but involves a good deal of work. I had at first
hoped to have a rather cozy little group of about eight or ten
advanced students, but the first day forty people showed up,
including many faculty members from M.I.T., some from
Harvard, a number of doctorate candidates, and quite a few
engineers from Lincoln Laboratory. . . .
I am giving 2 one and a half hour sessions each week, and the
response from the class is exceptionally good. They are almost
all following it at 100 percent. I also made a mistake in a fit of
generosity when I first came here of agreeing to give quite a
number of talks at colloquia, etc., and now that the days are
beginning to roll around, I find myself pretty pressed for time.
The people here are very interested in information theory, and
there is a good deal of work going on both by the faculty and by
graduate students specializing in that field.
The lecture audiences were as sharp as he might have hoped. “From
the questions raised in the discussion period, I have a pretty favorable
impression

of

the

people

attending,”

Shannon

told

another

correspondent. “So far lecturing has not become a chore. In fact, I
rather enjoy it, but I expect after a month or two, the novelty will
wear off.” It was, at least at the time, intellectually invigorating, not

least because teaching was something Shannon had never done in any
formal sense.
It was an opportunity, too, to glide across mathematics: freed of
most professional obligations, Shannon was able to use each talk to
dive deeply into a topic of personal interest. The “Seminar on
Information Theory” in the spring term of 1956 served as a carousel
for Shannon’s passions. In a lecture titled “Reliable Machines from
Unreliable Components,” Shannon presented the following challenge:
“In case men’s lives depend upon the successful operation of a
machine, it is difficult to decide on a satisfactorily low probability of
failure, and in particular, it may not be adequate to have men’s fates
depend upon the successful operation of single components as good
as they may be.” What followed was an analysis of the errorcorrecting and fail-safe mechanisms that might resolve such a
dilemma.
In another lecture, “The Portfolio Problem,” Shannon pondered the
implications for information theory of illicit gambling:
The following analysis, due to John Kelly, was inspired by news
reports of betting on whether or not the contestant on the TV
program “$64,000 Question” would win. It seems that one
enterprising gambler on the west coast, where the program
broadcast is delayed three hours, was receiving tips by
telephone before the local telecast took place. The question
arose as to how well the gambler could do if the communication
channel over which he received the tips was noisy.

And so on, like this. The lectures drew packed houses, including
many members of the faculty who were busy with cutting-edge
research of their own. Shannon and his musings, it seems, were draw
enough to pull even the stars at MIT away from their work.

When an offer came for a full professorship and a permanent
move to Massachusetts, it was hard to decline. If he accepted,
Shannon would be named a Professor of Communication Sciences,
and Professor of Mathematics, with permanent tenure, effective
January 1, 1957, with a salary of $17,000 per year (about $143,000 in
2017). For all the pull of university life, Shannon struggled with his
choice. Bell Labs had been his professional home for more than
fifteen years. It had been the site of his most productive years as a
researcher and thinker. It had afforded him unheard-of intellectual
freedom and supported him in his most audacious pursuits. But
Shannon was an outlier within the Labs culture; his antics were
tolerated, but it was only a matter of time, Shannon suspected, before
he would wear out his welcome. As he wrote to his supervisor,
Hendrik Bode, “It always seemed to me that the freedom I took [at the
Labs] was something of a special favor.”
Bell Labs, understandably, didn’t see it that way. They made a
counteroffer, with a generous increase in Shannon’s salary. But, in the
end, it wasn’t enough to sway him. His letter of resignation was a
thoughtful weighing of industry against the academy. “There are
certainly many points of superiority at Bell Labs,” Shannon writes.

“Perhaps most important among these is the freedom from teaching
and other duties with a consequent increase in time available for
research.” Shannon acknowledged, too, that Bell Labs was offering
him more money than MIT, “although the differential was not great in
my case and, at any rate, I personally feel other issues are much more
important.”
Bell Labs’ somewhat remote location in New Jersey was a
complicating factor in its own right. “The essential seclusion and
isolation of Bell Labs has both advantages and disadvantages. It
eliminates a good many time-wasting visitors, but at the same time
prevents many interesting contacts. Foreign visitors often spend a day
at Bell Laboratories but spend six months at MIT. This gives
opportunities for real interchange of ideas.” Bell Labs matched and
even exceeded MIT in the caliber of its thinking, Shannon allowed.
But in the end, “the general freedom in academic life is, in my view,
one of its most important features. The long vacations are exceedingly
attractive, as is also the general feeling of freedom in hours of work.”
The two institutions are “roughly on par,” which meant there was no
one decisive factor pulling Shannon to MIT—only a certain
restlessness on Shannon’s part after spending more than a decade and
a half in a single institution. “Having spent fifteen years at Bell Labs,”
Shannon writes, “I felt myself getting a little stale and unproductive
and a change of scene and of colleagues is very stimulating.”
Yet Shannon’s associations with Bell Labs were, in the end, too
strong for the Labs to simply sever all ties. Shannon was kept on the

payroll. As the Labs’ president, Bill Baker, later told Henry Pollak,
“Shannon is one of the great people for which Bell Labs is known and
going to be known. I will not take the chance of his ever being in
poverty.” Pollak would later joke that this was in keeping with the Bell
Labs spirit: “There were two kinds of researchers at Bell Labs: those
who are being paid for what they used to do, and those who are being
paid for what they were going to do. Nobody was paid for what they
were doing now.” Perhaps in hopes of a return tour, Shannon’s office
was kept for him, his nameplate still gracing the closed door.
After accepting the MIT offer, the Shannons left for Cambridge via
California—a year-long detour for a fellowship at Stanford’s Center
for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. Prestigious as the
appointment was, the Shannons mainly treated it as an excuse to see
the country. They made the leisurely drive through the West’s
national parks to California, and back, in a VW bus. Like many an East
Coast professor before and since, Shannon marveled at Palo Alto and
was said to have wondered aloud about how faculty there were able to
finish any work in such luscious surroundings. Not long after, he
recommended the same itinerary to a colleague: “You are going to
God’s country. All you need is a great white apron, a chef’s hat, and a
barbecue, and you’ll be all set.”

Before setting off for the West, though, Claude and Betty
purchased

a

house

at

5

Cambridge

Street

in

Winchester,

Massachusetts, a bedroom community eight miles north of MIT. Once

their California year was complete, they returned to their new home.
In Winchester, the Shannons were close enough to campus for a quick
commute but far enough away to live an essentially private life. They
were also living in a piece of history—an especially appropriate one in
light of Shannon’s background and interests.
Built in 1858, the house was constructed for Ellen Dwight, a greatgranddaughter of a genius tinkerer of an earlier era, Thomas Jefferson.
Originally seated on twelve acres, its design was inspired by
Monticello. Encircled by “a three-sided verandah with segmental
openings and chamfered posts,” the house was a stately three stories
at the crest of a “broad expanse of lawn reaching down to the wooded
shore of Upper Mystic Lake.” Toward the end of Shannon’s life, it was
added to the National Register of Historic Places, with the citation
noting its “panoramic views of the lake and distant hills,” as well as a
sumptuous interior:
The focal point of the plan is the first floor octagonal room. It
contains a parquet floor said to be laid in a pattern identical to a
floor at Monticello. The elaborate yellow marble fireplace
surround has acanthus leaf, waterleaf and egg and dart
moldings. Ceilings of the first story are approximately twelve
feet in height; the ceilings are embellished with ornate plaster
moldings around the perimeter. Windows of the lower story are
full-length six-light windows, which when raised, provide egress
to the verandah. The right parlor/library has a green marble
fireplace.

The house would figure prominently in Shannon’s public image.
Nearly every story about him, from 1957 on, situated him at the
house on the lake—usually in the two-story addition that the
Shannons built as an all-purpose room for gadget storage and display,
a space media profiles often dubbed the “toy room,” but which his
daughter Peggy and her two older brothers simply called “Dad’s room.”
The Shannons gave their home a name: Entropy House. Claude’s
status as a mathematical luminary would make it a pilgrimage site for
students and colleagues, especially as his on-campus responsibilities
dwindled toward nothing.

Even at MIT, Shannon bent his work around his hobbies and
enthusiasms. “Although he continued to supervise students, he was
not really a co-worker, in the normal sense of the term, as he always
seemed to maintain a degree of distance from his fellow associates,”
wrote one fellow faculty member. With no particular academic
ambitions, Shannon felt little pressure to publish academic papers. He
grew a beard, began running every day, and stepped up his tinkering.
What resulted were some of Shannon’s most creative and
whimsical endeavors. There was the trumpet that shot fire out of its
bell when played. The handmade unicycles, in every permutation: a
unicycle with no seat; a unicycle with no pedals; a unicycle built for
two. There was the eccentric unicycle: a unicycle with an off-center
hub that caused the rider to move up and down while pedaling
forward and added an extra degree of difficulty to Shannon’s juggling.

(The eccentric unicycle was the first of its kind. Ingenious though it
might have been, it caused Shannon’s assistant, Charlie Manning, to
fear for his safety—and to applaud when he witnessed the first
successful ride.) There was the chairlift that took surprised guests
down from the house’s porch to the edge of the lake. A machine that
solved Rubik’s cubes. Chess-playing machines. Handmade robots, big
and small. Shannon’s mind, it seems, was finally free to bring its most
outlandish ideas to mechanical life.
Looking back, Shannon summed it all up as happily pointless: “I’ve
always pursued my interests without much regard to financial value
or value to the world. I’ve spent lots of time on totally useless things.”
Tellingly, he made no distinction between his interests in information
and his interests in unicycles; they were all moves in the same game.
Robert Gallager, decades later, would offer a comment that
captures what many leading minds at the time likely thought of
Shannon’s private whimsies: “These were things that normal,
outstanding scientists did not do!” Gallager was a Shannon disciple,
and the remark was delivered with affection and only mock outrage,
but it isn’t too hard to imagine Shannon’s more skeptical
contemporaries wondering what the legend of Bell Labs could possibly
have been thinking. His arrival at MIT, after all, carried with it great
expectations. He had been awarded a named chair, tenure, and a
position in two different departments, mathematics and engineering.
“He was really lionized. He was going to be the luminary that led the

electrical engineering department into the future of information
theory,” said Trenchard More, a former Shannon student.

Initially, it seems, Shannon’s mere presence at MIT was
powerful. It was a mark of distinction to have someone like him on
the faculty, and he was useful in drawing energetic graduate students
who might otherwise have gone elsewhere. Len Kleinrock, a graduate
student of Shannon’s from that era, recalled the impact of Shannon’s
arrival on his own decision making about graduate programs: “If I’m
going to spend three or four years doing a PhD, I’m going to choose
the best professor I can think of, and I want to do something with
impact. The best professor, I knew, was Shannon.”
Kleinrock wasn’t the only one: graduate students in information
theory were abuzz at the possibility of working with the inventor of
their field. But the reality may have been somewhat less luminous.
The few dissertation advisees he took on at MIT saw him infrequently.
Asked to take on more students, he once responded, “I can’t be an
advisor. I can’t give advice to anybody. I don’t feel the right to advise.”
And it wasn’t just Shannon’s reticence: asking someone like Shannon
for help induced anxiety in even the most capable. For Gallager, who
began graduate study at MIT in the same year that Shannon joined the
faculty, there was the small problem of asking a living legend to pencil
him in:

I was in such awe of him that I could hardly bring myself to
speak to him! . . . He had very few doctoral students, and I think
part of the reason was that, if you were at MIT with a colossal
figure like Shannon around, you had to have a pretty big ego to
ask someone like Shannon to supervise you!
Kleinrock put it perhaps more succinctly: “I always felt honored
and a bit awkward that he’d be willing to work with me.”
Somewhat inadvertently, Shannon played into this perception and
kept himself at a remove from the normal comings and goings of
academic life. He didn’t join academic committees, jockey for status
within his department, or even show up to his office with any
regularity. What interaction he did have with his fellow faculty
members usually took the form of dropping by unannounced at their
lectures. One professor, Hermann Haus, remembered a lecture of his
that Shannon attended. “I was just so impressed,” Haus recalled, “he
was very kind and asked leading questions. In fact, one of those
questions led to an entire new chapter in a book I was writing.”
Shannon lectured as well, dressed in coat and tie, as was expected
of all MIT professors in those days, and occasionally flicking a piece of
chalk in the air with one hand while answering student questions
(and, impressively, never dropping the chalk). Once he was on faculty
full-time, the lectures, it seems, received mixed reviews. Some
students found them engaging and found Shannon to be just as good
as advertised. “His classes were like a delicious meal! You’d go there,
and the stuff he was giving you, it was clean, it was intuitive. It was

good mathematics and it had impact,” observed Kleinrock. For some,
watching Shannon think out loud in a classroom setting would prove
one of the defining moments of their academic lives.
Yet whatever challenges a genius might face explaining himself
were evidently on full display in Shannon’s lectures. The professor
may have been enjoying himself, but some in his audience struggled
to follow his train of thought. Dave Forney, then a student in the orbit
around Shannon, observed that the quality of his talks depended
almost entirely on the substance of the problem he had chosen to
focus on that day. “For some problems, he had good results. For
others, he made no progress beyond formulating the problem,” said
Forney, who added, “it was great for graduate students looking for a
thesis topic.”
In a way, even students who were fond of his lectures understood
that they were, for Shannon, less a chance to impart specific
information than to think out loud, to gather together MIT’s finest
and share some problem of personal interest. “He didn’t teach that
many classes,” Kleinrock recalled. “I don’t think he enjoyed it that
much. He did it well, but I think he wanted to get the word out to this
cadre of PhD students. Once he had taught them, he was happy
working with them but not to continue teaching in that way to every
generation.” Or, as Gallager remembered:
He was not the sort of person who would give a class and say
“this was the essence of such and such.” He would say, “Last
night, I was looking at this and I came up with this interesting

way of looking at it.” He’d say it with a sly grin, and he’d come
back with this absolutely beautiful thing.
This, then, was “Professor Shannon”: too brilliant to be understood,
or ignored. He was, by that point, more inspiration than instructor. Or,
as one student put it, “We all revered Shannon like a god.”

There were a lucky few students who managed to find a place at
the deity’s elbow. And for those who made it into Shannon’s
confidence, there were trips to the Winchester house and a standing
invitation to bring him interesting problems. Kleinrock described his
first interaction with Shannon: “He said, ‘Why don’t you come to my
house next Saturday and visit with me?’ and I said, ‘Terrific.’ You
know, here I was, this lowly graduate student, I couldn’t believe he
had invited me to his house! . . . I remember telling my colleagues, ‘I’m
going to Shannon’s house!’ ”
Shannon became a whetstone for others’ ideas and intuitions.
Rather than offer answers, he asked probing questions; instead of
solutions, he gave approaches. As Larry Roberts, a graduate student of
that time, remembered, “Shannon’s favorite thing to do was to listen
to what you had to say and then just say, ‘What about . . .’ and then
follow with an approach you hadn’t thought of. That’s how he gave his
advice.” This was how Shannon preferred to teach: as a fellow traveler
and problem solver, just as eager as his students to find a new route or
a fresh approach to a standing puzzle.

Visits with Shannon generated their own folklore, and his
suggestions during those sessions stayed with his students even
decades after the fact. One anecdote, from Robert Gallager, captures
both the power and subtlety of Shannon’s approach to the work of
instruction:
I had what I thought was a really neat research idea, for a much
better communication system than what other people were
building, with all sorts of bells and whistles. I went in to talk to
him about it and I explained the problems I was having trying to
analyze it. And he looked at it, sort of puzzled, and said, “Well,
do you really need this assumption?” And I said, well, I suppose
we could look at the problem without that assumption. And we
went on for a while. And then he said, again, “Do you need this
other assumption?” And I saw immediately that that would
simplify the problem, although it started looking a little
impractical and a little like a toy problem. And he kept doing
this, about five or six times. I don’t think he saw immediately
that that’s how the problem should be solved; I think he was
just groping his way along, except that he just had this instinct
of which parts of the problem were fundamental and which
were just details.
At a certain point, I was getting upset, because I saw this neat
research problem of mine had become almost trivial. But at a
certain point, with all these pieces stripped out, we both saw
how to solve it. And then we gradually put all these little

assumptions back in and then, suddenly, we saw the solution to
the whole problem. And that was just the way he worked. He
would find the simplest example of something and then he
would somehow sort out why that worked and why that was the
right way of looking at it.
Other visitors, though, found themselves occasionally beaten to the
punch by a mind that had mapped much of the terrain they were still
only beginning to explore. Irwin Jacobs, an MIT student of that era
and later the founder of Qualcomm, recalled: “People would go in,
discuss a new idea, and how they were approaching it—and then he’d
go over to one of his filing cabinets and pull out some unpublished
paper that covered the material very well!”

Unlike

traditional

mid-century

husbands

and

fathers,

Shannon spent many of his days around the house. Of her many
memories of her father, that would prove a distinctive one for
Shannon’s daughter, Peggy: “He did a lot of work at home so he would
only go into the office to teach and to meet with graduate students,
but if he didn’t have to be there, he didn’t spend much time at MIT. So
my sense growing up was that he was around a lot. It was different
from a lot of working people.” Entropy House became his office;
students dropped by, seeking feedback on projects but just as often
looking to see what the Sage of Winchester had cooked up at his inhome laboratory. Even more conventional professors and old Bell Labs

hands would make the trek to Winchester, and Shannon would walk
them from room to room, all the while showing off his collection of
contraptions and oddities. Guests were impressed by his collection of
books, his two-story invention-room-cum-mechanic-shop, and the
stunning array of gizmos and gadgets in the house.
It wasn’t only Shannon’s constant presence in the house, or the
collection of electromechanical ephemera, that set him apart from
other fathers. The Shannons were peculiar in the way that only a
family headed by two mathematical minds might be. For instance,
when it came time to decide who would handle the dishes after
dinner, the Shannons turned to a game of chance: they wound up a
robotic mouse, set it in the middle of their dining room table, and
waited for the mouse to drop over one of the edges—and thus select
that evening’s dishwasher.
Then there were the spontaneous moments of math instruction. At
a party hosted by the Shannons, young Peggy Shannon was in charge
of the toothpicks. She was carrying a box of them on the house’s
verandah—and then dropped it by accident, spilling its contents onto
the porch. Her father, standing nearby, paused, took stock of the
mess, and then said, “Did you know, you can calculate pi with that?”
He was referring to Buffon’s Needle, a famous problem in geometric
probability: it turns out that when you drop a series of needles (or
toothpicks) on an evenly lined floor, the proportion of needles falling
across a line can be used to estimate pi with surprising accuracy. Most

important, Peggy remembered, her dad wasn’t angry with her for the
mess.
The Shannon household coalesced around the parents’ passions:
chess and music became family pastimes, and stock picking and
tinkering were a part of everyday life. Shannon took his children to
circus performances. Alice in Wonderland, the favorite of many a
mathematician, was in the air; Shannon especially enjoyed quoting
from “Jabberwocky.” When it came to challenging math assignments,
Peggy was regularly pointed in her father’s direction, even though, as
she admits, this was overkill; anyone in the household, including her
two older brothers, could have helped. He was, by her account, a
patient teacher, though he often went on tangents that betrayed his
own inclinations. He complained about the educational fad of the
“New Math” and would digress on concepts like imaginary numbers
well past the point of helping his daughter finish her homework.

MIT, and its limited pressures on Shannon, also offered him the
chance to step back from day-to-day work on information theory and
observe the landscape of the still-coalescing digital world. Those
years, said Thomas Kailath, who studied under Shannon, were
something of “a golden age of information theory at MIT”—one in
which Shannon played the role of godfather and network node, if no
longer a central participant. Even if they had no direct contact with
Shannon, a generation of new minds were brought into the field, with
Shannon’s work piquing their curiosity. As Anthony Ephremides, a

later information theorist, put it, “The intellectual content of his
approach was so appealing that many people who had inclinations to
go in different directions said, ‘Wow, I like this! This is a beautiful way
of looking at this process about which I knew nothing, so let me find
out more.’ ”
That more relaxed role might have seemed an indulgence, except
that Shannon had, for all his humor and insouciance, been
phenomenally productive by the time he left Bell Labs for MIT. Even
with his aversion to writing things down, the famous attic stuffed
with half-finished work, and countless hypotheses circulating in his
mind—and even when one paper on the scale of his “Mathematical
Theory of Communication” would have counted as a lifetime’s
accomplishment—Shannon still managed to publish hundreds of
pages’ worth of papers and memoranda, many of which opened new
lines of inquiry in information theory. That he had also written
seminal works in other fields—switching, cryptography, chess
programming—and that he might have been a pathbreaking geneticist,
had he cared to be, was extraordinary.
Yet Shannon had also come to accept that his own best days were
behind him. “I believe that scientists get their best work done before
they are fifty, or even earlier than that. I did most of my best work
while I was young,” Shannon said. This belief in an implicit age cap on
mathematical genius was hardly unique to Shannon. As the
mathematician G. H. Hardy famously wrote, “no mathematician

should ever allow himself to forget that mathematics, more than any
other art or science, is a young man’s game.”
While there have been notable exceptions to that rule, Shannon
was convinced that he would not be one of them. His Bell Labs
colleague Henry Pollak recalls visiting Shannon at home in
Winchester to bring him up to date on a new development in
communications science. “I started telling him about it, and for a brief
time he got quite enthused about this. And then he said, ‘Nuh-uh, I
don’t want to think. I don’t want to think that much anymore.’ It was
the beginning of the end in his case, I think. He just—he turned
himself off.”
But if Shannon turned off the most rigorous part of his mind, he
also freed himself to take a bird’s-eye view of the emerging
Information Age that his work had made possible. A crucial legacy of
that work was the redirection of his colleagues’ efforts. The old era
had ended, one in which communications scientists were divided by
medium, locked into fields of specialization whose gains did not shed
any obvious light on one another.
“For

everybody

who

built

communication

systems,

before

[Shannon], it was a matter of trying to find a way to send voice, trying
to find a way to send data, like Morse code,” recalled Gallager. “The
thing that Claude said is that you don’t have to worry about all those
different things.” Now their worries had a far more productive outlet:
the coding, storage, and transmission of bits. “Once all the engineers
were doing that, they start making this enormously rapid progress,

start finding better and better ways of digitizing things and of storing
and of communicating these very simple objects called binary digits,
instead of these very complicated things like voice waveforms. If you
look at it that way, Shannon is really responsible for the digital
revolution.”
And even though the revolution had begun to pass him by,
Shannon’s lectures at MIT and his talks around the country became a
survey of the world to come. At a talk at the University of
Pennsylvania in 1959, for instance, he said,
I think that this present century in a sense will see a great
upsurge and development of this whole information business . . .
the business of collecting information and the business of
transmitting it from one point to another, and perhaps most
important of all, the business of processing it—using it to
replace man at semi-rote operations at a factory . . . even the
replacement of man in the things that we almost think of as
creative, things like mathematics or translating languages.
If words like that seem self-evident and unremarkable to us today,
it’s worth remembering that Shannon was speaking more than a
quarter century before the birth of the World Wide Web, and at a
time when virtually all computers were still room-sized. To talk about
“the information business” then was to talk about a world that was
still more fantasy than fact.

So while it’s a commonplace to say that Shannon’s best thinking
was over by 1948, that criticism might lead us to overlook a rich body
of work, one marked by a playfulness of mind that was Shannon’s
lifelong calling card. Wish away the dilettante who spent the bulk of
his later life on chess, machines, and juggling, and you’d also wish
away the curious genius who invented information; it came, all of it,
from the same place.

27
Inside Information
One of the great Shannon legends goes like this: in a fit of inspired
mathematics, Shannon cracked a code for gaming the stock market.
Huddled over old copies of the Wall Street Journal, Shannon put the
full force of his mind to developing a series of algorithms that would
make order of the market’s chaos, giving him special insight into the
tides of finance. It made him rich, and it might have made him the
nation’s leading investment guru, had he chosen to publicize his
strategy.
As with most of the legends surrounding Shannon’s life, it grew
from a small grain of truth: in the 1960s and 1970s, Betty and Claude
did play the markets obsessively. The process became a family affair,
recalled Peggy Shannon:
Much of the conversation around home would be about the
stock market, because . . . much of my parents’ focus was what
was the market doing. They taught me to read the Wall Street
Journal and the stocks very early. You’d come down and open

the newspaper, and they’d have me read because my eyesight
was better than theirs. And it was a way to engage the kids. . . .
Then eventually they set up a small personal computer to carry
the quotes during the day and then check again at the end of
the day, so there were computer printouts floating around the
house with stock quotes on them.
By then the family had no need of the additional income from
stock picking. Not only was there the combination of the MIT and Bell
Labs pay, but Shannon had been on the ground floor of a number of
technology companies. One former colleague, Bill Harrison, had
encouraged Shannon to invest in his company, Harrison Laboratories,
which was later acquired by Hewlett-Packard. A college friend of
Shannon, Henry Singleton, put Shannon on the board of the company
he created, Teledyne, which grew to become a multibillion-dollar
conglomerate. As Shannon retold the story, he made the investment
simply because “I had a good opinion of him.” If there can be said to
have been an old boys’ club of Silicon Valley in its initial days, then
Claude Shannon was a card-carrying member—and he benefited from
all the privileges therein.
The club benefited from Shannon as well, in his roles as network
node and informal consultant. For instance, when Teledyne received
an acquisition offer from a speech recognition company, Shannon
advised Singleton to turn it down. From his own experience at the
Labs, he doubted that speech recognition would bear fruit anytime
soon: the technology was in its early stages, and during his time at the

Labs, he’d seen much time and energy fruitlessly sunk into it. The
years of counsel paid off, for Singleton and for Shannon himself: his
investment in Teledyne achieved an annual compound return of 27
percent over twenty-five years.

The stock market was, in some ways, the strangest of Shannon’s
late-life enthusiasms. One of the recurrent tropes of recollections
from family and friends is Shannon’s seeming indifference to money.
By one telling, Shannon moved his life savings out of his checking
account only when Betty insisted that he do so. A colleague recalled
seeing a large uncashed check on Shannon’s desk at MIT, which in
time gave rise to another legend: that his office was overflowing with
checks he was too absentminded to cash. In a way, Shannon’s interest
in money resembled his other passions. He was not out to accrue
wealth for wealth’s sake, nor did he have any burning desire to own
the finer things in life. But money created markets and math puzzles,
problems that could be analyzed and interpreted and played out.
Shannon cared less about what money could buy than about the
interesting games that money made possible.
The missing part of the story, as it happens, is Betty. The stock
market intrigued her, and it was Betty, not Claude, who first drew the
family into investing. She managed the family’s finances—“I run the
checkbook,” she once told an interviewer. Peggy Shannon recalled
that “their work in the stock market was completely a team effort. It
is not the case that my father had these mathematical ideas about the

stock market and then figured out how to put them to work to make
money. . . . It was always a joint project.” And it was made possible by
the Shannons’ shared tolerance for risk. As Peggy put it, “they were
gamblers. They didn’t shy away from making risky financial
decisions.”
Their kernel of interest in the market grew into a consuming
hobby. The two of them, but Betty especially, began devouring books
on trading, contemplating various market philosophies, and graphing
possible scenarios for stocks. They studied many of history’s most
successful investors, including Bernard Baruch, Hetty Green, and
Benjamin Graham. They read Adam Smith’s The Wealth of Nations and
studied Von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern’s work on game theory.
Claude, unsurprisingly, contributed a device that was said to mirror
how money flowed into and out of the market.
When Shannon offered to speak on the stock market at MIT, word
of his talk forced him to relocate to the university’s largest lecture
hall, under its famous dome; even there, it was standing room only.
Shannon proposed a theory that would allow an investor to profit
from a stock whose value was declining, by making constant trades to
take advantage of its price fluctuations. In answer to the very first
question from the audience—Did he use this theory in his own
investing?—he replied: “Nah, the commissions would kill you.”
This talk—probably more than any particular feat of financial
wizardry—is the main source of the legend of Shannon as stockpicking genius. Later Shannon seemed astounded by the attention his

lecture received and unusually tickled when the subject came up in an
interview:
I even did some work on the theory of stocks and the stock
market, which is among other papers that I have not published.
Everybody wants to know what’s in them! [Shannon laughs.] It’s
funny. I gave a talk at M.I.T. on this subject some twenty years
ago and outlined the mathematics, but never published it, and
to this day people ask about it. Just last year when we were over
in Brighton more than one person came up to me and said, “Hi,
heard you talked at M.I.T. about the stock market!” I was amazed
that anybody would even have remembered it!
But for anyone searching for a grand unifying theory to explain the
market’s fluctuations, Shannon was quick to put such speculations to
rest. He and his wife were, in his own words, “fundamentalists, not
technicians.” The Shannons had toyed with technical analysis, and
they found it wanting. As Shannon himself put it, “I think that the
technicians who work so much with price charts, with ‘head and
shoulders formulations’ and ‘plunging necklines’ are working with
what I would call a very noisy reproduction of the important data.”
Complicated formulas mattered a great deal less, Shannon argued,
than a company’s “people and the product.” He went on:
A lot of people look at the stock price, when they should be
looking at the basic company and its earnings. There are many
problems concerned with the prediction of stochastic processes,

for example the earnings of companies. . . . My general feeling is
that it is easier to choose companies which are going to succeed,
than to predict short term variations, things which last only
weeks or months, which they worry about on Wall Street Week.
There is a lot more randomness there and things happen which
you cannot predict, which cause people to sell or buy a lot of
stock.
From a lesser mathematical mind, this might have seemed like
something of an evasion, but when Shannon used words like
“stochastic processes,” he spoke from deep experience with the
underlying math. And it was his view that market timing and tricky
mathematics were no match for a solid company with strong growth
prospects and sound leadership.
So the Shannons sized up start-up founders in person whenever
they could. They sampled products and prototypes. When they were
mulling an investment in Kentucky Fried Chicken, as William
Poundstone recounts, they bought several buckets’ worth for a taste
test with friends.
Beyond the research, there was another factor, one that Shannon
was secure enough to readily acknowledge as key to his success.
Asked if he was lucky in life, Shannon answered, “Far beyond any
reasonable expectations.” By his own admission, Shannon had been
fortunate in his timing, and privileged in knowing certain company
founders and securing early investments. The bulk of his wealth was
concentrated in Teledyne, Motorola, and HP stock; after getting in on

the ground floor, the smartest thing Shannon did was hold on. His
daughter, Peggy, summed it up with a statement that could just as
well have come from her father: her parents “used common sense and
connections and had good luck.”
If Shannon’s work in the field of finance can be said to have left
anything of lasting note, it’s the memorable one-liners, many of which
are among the best-known stories about him. “I make my money on
the stock market. I don’t make it by proving theorems,” Shannon once
famously told Robert Price. Asked what sort of information theory
was best for investing, Shannon joked: “Inside information.”

28
A Gadgeteer’s Paradise
Many of Shannon’s off-the-clock creations were whimsical—a
machine that made sarcastic remarks, for instance, or the Roman
numeral calculator. Still others showed a flair for the dramatic and
dazzling: the trumpet that spit flames or the machine that solved
Rubik’s

cubes.

Still

other

devices

he

built

anticipated

real

technological innovations by more than a generation. One in
particular stands out, not just because it was so far ahead of its time,
but because of just how close it came to landing Shannon in trouble
with the law—and the mob.
Long before the Apple Watch or the Fitbit, what was arguably the
world’s first wearable computer was conceived by Ed Thorp, then a
little-known graduate student in physics at the University of
California, Los Angeles. Thorp was the rare physicist who felt at home
with both Vegas bookies and bookish professors. He loved math,
gambling, and the stock market, roughly in that order. The tables and
the market he loved for the challenge: Could you create predictability

out of seeming randomness? What could give one person an edge in
games of chance? Thorp wasn’t content just pondering these
question; like Shannon, he set out to find and build answers.
In 1960, Thorp was a junior professor at MIT. He had been working
on a theory for playing blackjack, the results of which he hoped to
publish in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Shannon was the only academy member in MIT’s mathematics
department, so Thorp sought him out. “The secretary warned me that
Shannon was only going to be in for a few minutes, not to expect
more, and that he didn’t spend time on subjects (or people) that didn’t
interest him. Feeling awed and lucky, I arrived at Shannon’s office to
find a thinnish alert man of middle height and build, somewhat sharp
featured,” Thorp recalled.
Thorp had piqued Shannon’s interest with the blackjack paper, to
which Shannon recommended only a change of title, from “A Winning
Strategy for Blackjack” to the more mundane “A Favorable Strategy
for Twenty-One,” the better to win over the academy’s staid
reviewers. The two shared a love of putting math in unfamiliar
territory in search of chance insights. After Shannon “crossexamined” Thorp about his blackjack paper, he asked, “Are you
working on anything else in the gambling area?”
Thorp confessed. “I decided to spill my other big secret and told
him about roulette. Ideas about the project flew between us. Several
exciting hours later, as the wintery sky turned dusky, we finally broke
off with plans to meet again on roulette.” As one writer put it, “Thorp

had inadvertently set one of the century’s great minds on yet another
tangent.”
Thorp was immediately invited to Shannon’s house. The basement,
Thorp remembered, was “a gadgeteer’s paradise. . . . There were
hundreds of mechanical and electrical categories, such as motors,
transistors, switches, pulleys, gears, condensers, transformers, and on
and on.” Thorp was in awe: “Now I had met the ultimate gadgeteer.”
It was in this tinkerer’s laboratory that they set out to understand
how roulette could be gamed, ordering “a regulation roulette wheel
from Reno for $1,500,” a strobe light, and a clock whose hand
revolved once per second. Thorp was given inside access to Shannon
in all his tinkering glory:
Gadgets . . . were everywhere. He had a mechanical coin tosser
which could be set to flip the coin through a set number of
revolutions, producing a head or tail according to the setting. As
a joke, he built a mechanical finger in the kitchen which was
connected to the basement lab. A pull on the cable curled the
finger in a summons. Claude also had a swing about 35 feet long
attached to a huge tree, on a slope. We started the swing from
uphill and the downhill end of the arc could be as much as 15 or
20 feet above the ground. . . . Claude’s neighbors on the Mystic
lake were occasionally astounded to see a figure “walking on the
water.” It was me using a pair of Claude’s huge styrofoam
“shoes” designed just for this.

And yet, Thorp wrote, what impressed him more than any of the
gadgets was his host’s uncanny ability to “see” a solution to a problem
rather than to muscle it out with unending work. “Shannon seemed to
think with ‘ideas’ more than with words or formulas. A new problem
was like a sculptor’s block of stone and Shannon’s ideas chiseled away
the obstacles until an approximate solution emerged like an image,
which he proceeded to refine as desired with more ideas.”
For eight months, the pair dove into the challenge of developing a
device that would predict the final resting spot of a roulette ball. For
the device to beat the house, Thorp and Shannon didn’t have to
predict the precise outcome every time: they just had to acquire any
kind of slight edge over the odds. Over time, and with enough bets,
even the smallest advantage would multiply into a meaningful return.
Picture a roulette wheel divided up into eight segments: by June
1961, Thorp and Shannon had a working version of a device that
could determine which of those segments would end up holding the
ball. As soon as they concluded that they had, in fact, found their
edge, Shannon impressed upon Thorp the need for absolute secrecy.
He invoked the work of social network theorists, who argued that two
people chosen at random would be, at most, three degrees of
separation from one another. In other words, the distance between
Shannon, Thorp, and an enraged casino owner was slim.
The device that they created “was the size of a pack of cigarettes,”
operated by Thorp’s and Shannon’s big toes, “with microswitches in

our shoes,” and delivered gambling advice in the form of music. Thorp
explained:
One switch initialized the computer and the other timed the
rotor and the ball. Once the rotor was timed, the computer
transmitted a musical scale whose eight tones marked the rotor
octants passing the reference mark. . . . We each heard the
musical output through a tiny loudspeaker in one ear canal. We
painted the wires connecting the computer and the speaker to
match our skin and hair and affixed them with “spirit gum.” The
wires were the diameter of a hair to make them inconspicuous
but even the hair thin steel wire we used was fragile.
They took it to the casinos, where Thorp and Shannon took turns
placing bets. “The division of labor,” Thorp said, “was that Claude
stood by the wheel and timed, while I sat at the far end of the layout,
unable to see the spinning ball well, and placed bets.” Their wives
served as lookouts, “checking to see whether the casino suspected
anything and if we were inconspicuous.” Even so, they had some close
calls: “Once a lady next to me looked over in horror,” Thorp recalled. “I
left the table quickly and discovered the speaker peering from my ear
canal like an alien insect.”
Mishaps aside, Thorp was confident that the duo could run the
tables. Claude, Betty, and Thorp’s wife, Vivian, were less sure. Thorp
would later concede that the others were probably on the right side of
caution: the Nevada gaming industry was, notoriously, entangled with

the mafia. Had Shannon and Thorp been caught, the odds were
against two MIT professors talking their way out of it. The experiment
was called off after its trial run, and the wearable computer was
consigned to Shannon’s growing heap of curiosities.

29
Peculiar Motions
Do you mind if I hang you upside down by your legs?”
From any other professor, this question might have elicited
concern. But from Claude Shannon, it was par for the course. Shannon
had in mind an elaborate experiment: combining two forms of juggling
—bounce and toss—by suspending a juggler by his feet.
Toss juggling is the airborne form of the art most familiar to us.
Bounce juggling, on the other hand, consists in keeping objects in
motion by hitting them against the ground in a pattern, a motion akin
to the beating of hand drums. As generations of jugglers have
discovered in the early stages of mastering their craft, bouncing items
against the ground requires far less energy than tossing them in the
air; in a bounce juggle, the balls arrive at the hand at the very top of
their arc, the slowest speed they’ll have during the entire sequence.
But even though the bounce juggler has the advantage of catching a
ball at the nadir of its speed, conventional juggling of the tossing-andcatching kind is a more fluid motion, one that comes more naturally

to us and affords the juggler more control than the percussive effort
of bounce juggling.
Shannon wondered: Was it possible to marry the physics of these
two styles? Could you capture, in one motion, the fluidity of toss
juggling and the efficiency of bounce juggling? In practical terms: If
you were dangling by your feet, could you toss balls in the air, let
gravity do the work of bringing the balls down to earth, and then
catch them again? Both the inquiry and the method were vintage
Shannon: whimsical, indifferent to practicalities, and originating in an
activity that typical professors might have dubbed unserious, but
which Shannon, a tenured member of the MIT faculty, found amusing
enough to merit scholarly time and attention.
That’s how Arthur Lewbel, an MIT student, found himself
suspended by his feet in the middle of Shannon’s living room. The
balls went up . . . and dropped unceremoniously to the ground. “As a
physical experiment, it was a complete failure,” remembered Lewbel.
Some physical limits even perfect math can’t crack; and in this case,
even the great Claude Shannon couldn’t overcome the most obvious
problem with the experiment’s design: How well does anyone do
anything upside down?

Lewbel had become accustomed to inquiries of the may-I-hangyou-upside-down variety. He was the founder of the MIT Juggling
Club and first met Shannon when the famous information theorist
casually dropped by the club’s meeting unannounced. Shannon was

there for the same reason that parents the world over find themselves
in rooms not necessarily of their choosing: his daughter, Peggy,
wanted him to go. She’d read about the club in the Boston Globe, and
while it probably required minimal arm-twisting to get her unicycling,
tinkering father to attend, the initial interest in the Juggling Club was
Peggy’s.
“He just showed up, and didn’t tell anyone who he was. There were
a bunch of jugglers standing outside practicing and he just walked up
and said, ‘Can I measure your juggling?’ ” remembered Lewbel. “That
was the first thing he said to us, and it was something no one had ever
asked us before.” Lewbel and the other jugglers agreed to be
measured, and Shannon and Lewbel developed a fast friendship.
Drop-ins from star faculty of Shannon’s stature weren’t unusual. As
Lewbel tells it, “One nice thing about juggling at MIT is that you never
know who will show up. For example, one day Doc Edgerton, inventor
of the strobe light, stopped by the juggling club and asked if he could
photograph some of us juggling under strobe lights.” What was
unusual was a return visit. But return Shannon did, repeatedly, even
hosting the club at his Winchester home when they needed space for
pizza-and-movie night. “The Juggling Club and the jugglers enchanted
us,” remembered Peggy Shannon.
Shannon had dabbled in juggling for decades. As a boy, he had
imagined himself a fairground performer. At Bell Labs, the stories of
his achievements in information theory were almost always
accompanied by tales of his juggling while riding a unicycle in the

Labs’ narrow halls. At home in Winchester, there were ample objects
stashed in the playroom to toss and catch. By that point, Shannon had
developed his talents as an amateur juggler far past the point of mere
amusement: he was said to be able to juggle four balls, which, as
anyone who has tried to juggle knows, is a worthy achievement.
Ronald Graham, a fellow mathematician-juggler, attributed some of
his success to a trick borrowed from Galileo. “When Galileo wanted to
slow gravity down, he just tilted a table” and let a ball roll from one
end to the other, said Graham. “Imagine a big table, and then as you
tilt the table, you get closer to 1 g.” By sliding pucks up a tilted air
hockey table, Shannon was able to study their patterns, and refine his
juggling technique, in a kind of slow motion. The pucks’ paths “were
not parabolas, just pointy, and you could practice doing that.”
Part of juggling’s appeal to Shannon might have been the fact that
it didn’t come easily. For all his mathematical and mechanical gifts, “it
was something he simply could not master, making it all the more
tantalizing,” wrote Jon Gertner. “Shannon would often lament that he
had small hands, and thus had great difficulty making the jump from
four balls to five—a demarcation, some might argue, between a good
juggler and a great juggler.” Here, at least, Shannon was destined to be
merely good.

Juggling lacks the nobility of mathematical pastimes like chess or
music. And yet the tradition of mathematician-jugglers is an ancient
one. As best as we can tell, that tradition began in the tenth century

CE in an open-air market in Baghdad. It was there that Abu Sahl al-

Quhi, later one of the great Muslim astronomers, got his start in life
juggling. A few years later, Al-Quhi became a kind of court
mathematician for the local emir, who, fascinated by planetary
motion, built an observatory in the garden of his palace and put AlQuhi in charge. The appointment bore some fine mathematical fruit:
Al-Quhi invented an adjustable geometrical compass, likely the
world’s first, and led the revival among Muslim geometers of the study
of the Greek thinkers Archimedes and Apollonius.
From juggling in a market to measuring the courses of planets:
what they had in common, what drew Al-Quhi and so many of future
number-crunching jugglers, was the patterns of parabolas and arcs,
equations played out over open space. As Graham observed,
“mathematics is often described as the science of patterns. Juggling
can be thought of as the art of controlling patterns in time and space.”
So it’s no surprise that generations of mathematicians could be found
on university quads, tossing things in the air and catching them.
Burkard Polster, author of The Mathematics of Juggling, writes, “next
time you see some jugglers practicing in a park, ask them whether
they like mathematics. Chances are, they do. . . . Most younger
mathematicians, physicists, computer scientists, engineers, etc. will at
least have given juggling three balls a go at some point in their lives.”

So what drew Shannon to the study of juggling? “He liked peculiar
motions. . . . I think what he liked about juggling was that it was a

peculiar physical motion,” noted Lewbel. It was in the early 1970s that
these peculiarities finally tugged enough to provoke him to write a
mathematical paper on the topic.
Juggling, observed Lewbel, “is complex enough to have interesting
properties and simple enough to allow the modeling of these
properties.” But for all of its mathematical richness, when Shannon
first began his work on the topic, he was starting from scratch: the
field had no body of written work.
The first important scientific work on the topic was in the field of
psychology. In 1903, Edgar James Swift published a paper in the
American Journal of Psychology that studied the time it took to learn
how to juggle, as an examination of the most effective ways to teach
neurosensory skills. The nature of juggling itself seems to have been
something of an afterthought. The insight Swift was after wasn’t
“How does a juggler learn his craft?” so much as “How can a human
being learn any craft?” Following in his footsteps, psychologists
continued to use juggling as a research tool into the mid-twentieth
century. But where psychologists had found juggling useful in their
research, mathematicians had been reluctant to use a favorite pastime
as a source of data and experiments. Until Shannon arrived on the
scene, no papers had explored the math of juggling.
How could that be? How had millennia’s worth of mathematicians
tried their hands at juggling but published no mathematical results on
the topic? In some ways, it’s not hard to understand. Mathematics was
then, as now, a fiercely competitive discipline, and while card games,

puzzles, juggling, and other such entertainments may have been
amusing mathematical hobbies, no serious, ambitious mathematician
would have mistaken a circus routine for a topic deserving sustained
research or publication. No one, that is, until Claude Shannon.
Unmoved by material concerns, freed of the need to burnish his
reputation, and driven by curiosity for curiosity’s sake, he could throw
himself headlong into the study of juggling without any of the
misgivings his colleagues might feel about doing the same.

In the context of Shannon’s other work, the juggling paper is
unremarkable. It didn’t inaugurate a new field of study, and it didn’t
bring him international acclaim. Shannon neither published it nor
entirely finished it. Though Shannon was perhaps the first scientist to
study juggling with mathematical rigor, the paper’s striking feature
isn’t its originality or the quality of its mathematics, but rather what it
reveals about its author’s wide-ranging reading and research. If
information theory, genetics, and switching proved the depth of
Shannon’s thinking, juggling displayed his dexterity. It is a testament,
as well, to Shannon’s belief that just about anything could be the
object of serious mathematical analysis.
Shannon opens the paper with a dialogue from Lord Valentine’s
Castle, Robert Silverberg’s science fiction novel set on the distant
planet of Majipoor. It’s a chronicle of the adventures of an itinerant
juggler named Valentine, who, as it happens, is actually a king whose
throne and title have been taken from him:

“Do you think juggling’s a mere trick?” the little man asked,
sounding wounded. “An amusement for the gapers? A means of
picking up a crown or two at a provincial carnival? It is all those
things, yes, but first it is a way of life, friend, a creed, a species
of worship.”
“And a kind of poetry,” said Carabella.
Sleet nodded. “Yes, that too. And a mathematics. It teaches
calmness, control, balance, a sense of the placement of things
and the underlying structure of motion. There is a silent music
to it. Above all there is a discipline. Do I sound pretentious?”
For Shannon, it was important that people reading this paper “try
not to forget the poetry, the comedy and the music of juggling for the
Carabellas and Margaritas future and present.” We can sense
something of Shannon’s self-consciousness in the next sentence,
when he interrupts this train of thought and cribs Sleet to ask the
reader, “Does this sound pretentious?”
If it did, Shannon knew it. It might explain why his next paragraphs
seek to soften the lofty-sounding beginnings of the paper by
grounding the reader in the history of juggling. In the span of roughly
two pages, he travels over 4,000 years and covers a considerable range
of popular and cultural nods to juggling. The paper’s historical tour
opens in early Egypt, circa 1900 BCE, in tombs with juggling scenes
etched into the walls, four women each tossing three balls apiece.
From there it’s off to the Polynesian island of Tonga, with the sailoradventurer Captain James Cook and scientist Georg Forster. The year

was 1774, and Forster observed, in A Voyage Round the World, that
the Tongans had a flair for keeping multiple objects suspended in the
air in sequence. Shannon quotes Forster’s observation of one girl who,
“lively and easy in all her actions, played with five gourds, of the size
of small apples, perfectly globular. She threw them up into the air one
after another continually, and never failed to catch them all with
great dexterity, at least for a quarter of an hour.”
From there it was back to dry land and 400 BCE, to Xenophon’s The
Banquet and an audience with Socrates, who, upon seeing a young
woman juggle twelve hoops in the air, is moved to observe, “This girl’s
feat, gentlemen, is only one of many proofs that woman’s nature is
really not a whit inferior to man’s, except in its lack of judgment and
physical strength. So if any one of you has a wife, let him confidently
set about teaching her whatever he would like to have her know.” For
Shannon, Socrates’s comment is interesting on two levels. For one
thing, if the girl in this scene did in fact juggle twelve hoops, she
would hold the world record for the most objects juggled at a single
time. On this fact Shannon is willing to give Xenophon and Socrates
the benefit of the doubt: “Who could ask for better witnesses than the
great philosopher Socrates and the famous historian Xenophon?
Surely they could both count to twelve and were careful observers.”
But that’s Shannon’s only concession; Socrates’s chauvinism
doesn’t sit well. Mustering as much antagonism as we might imagine
Shannon capable of, he dismisses Socrates’s blinkered view of a
woman’s capacities. “It is amusing to note how Socrates, departing

from his famous method of teaching by question, makes a definite
statement and immediately suffers from foot-in-mouth disease. Had
he but put his period nine words before the end he could have been
the prescient prophet of the women’s equality movement.” Later in
the paper, Shannon makes the case for female jugglers more explicit.
Two he singles out for special mention: Lottie Brunn, the “world’s
fastest female juggler” and a fixture on the 1920s European theater
circuit; and Trixie Firschke, the “first lady of juggling,” a German child
star born to a Budapest circus family.
So, beginning in ancient Egypt and passing through the medieval
minstrel’s hybrid of “juggling, magic, and comedy,” Shannon ends in
the world of twentieth-century variety shows. Their leading lights—
including W. C. Fields—inspired a generation of girls and boys,
including the young Claude Shannon, to terrify their parents with talk
of running away to join the circus.

The history lesson concluded, it was on to a more serious inquiry:
how to understand the psyche of a juggler and the practice of
juggling? Specifically, how does one make sense of a practice that
requires precision but is also the stuff of comedy? A gymnast’s fault
elicits pity, a kind of disappointment shared by performer and
audience; a juggler, failing to catch a club, is just as likely to be met
with laughter. How do jugglers deal with this?
“Jugglers are surely the most vulnerable of all entertainers,”
Shannon writes, walking up again to the edge of autobiography.

Indeed, most serious jugglers are forced to develop a range of mind
games and public feints to deal with the anguish of “the missed catch
or the dropped club.” Their coping strategies vary with skill level:
lesser jugglers paper over their failures with comedy and props; the
experts make their failures appear as intentional as their successes.
But this vulnerability is precisely why, Shannon notes, juggling’s
ranks can be roughly divided into two camps: performance jugglers
and technical jugglers. Technicians are in a numbers game, an arms
race of objects juggled. The more objects in the air, the bigger the
bragging rights. Shannon references one of the world’s great
technicians, Enrico Rastelli, about whom Vanity Fair would say in
eulogy: “In his twenty years’ devotion to his craft this son of Italy
elevated it, for probably the first time, to what was unmistakably an
art.” Rastelli, Shannon noted, was able to keep ten balls in the air
simultaneously. Shannon also remarks that Rastelli “could do a onearmed handstand while juggling three balls in the other hand and
rotating a cylinder with his feet.”
Rastelli and his breed of technical juggler held the most interest for
Shannon, and mathematicians since. Call it seriousness of purpose, or
the possibility of organizing by numbers and implicit formulas the
quest to manage an ever-increasing number of objects. For the
mathematician, performance juggling, enjoyable though it might be to
watch, possesses none of these qualities. The joy of the crowd, the
thrill of the motion, the comedy of the effort—all of these are
amusing but ultimately uninteresting to a mind trained in math. The

paper’s journey begins here: in the challenge of increasing the number
of objects juggled while still maintaining precision, the intersection of
mathematics and movement.

It shouldn’t come as any particular surprise that Shannon, whose
love of juggling was surpassed only by his love of music, opens the
mathematical section of the paper with a reference to jazz—in
particular, to the drummer Gene Krupa, who said that “the cross
rhythm of 3 against 2 is one of the most seductive known.” For
Shannon, the pattern of three against two is a useful analogue for an
introduction to the mathematics of juggling. It’s the pattern by which
most people first learn to juggle: three balls in two hands.
Pick apart the motions of a juggler and what emerges are a series of
predictable parabolas. One ball tossed in the air produces one arc;
multiple balls, multiple arcs. All that’s left is to combine them into a
consistent pattern, set to a rhythm. This was how Shannon
approached the problem of juggling—not only as an exercise in
coordination, but as an algebraic formula. His juggling theorem stated
the following:
(F + D) H = (V + D) N
F = how long a ball stays in the air
D = how long a ball is held in a hand
H = number of hands
V = how long a hand is empty

N = number of balls being juggled
Shannon’s theorem tracks time continuously. As Lewbel put it,
“The way the juggler achieves the rhythm in Shannon’s theorem is by
trading off time in a continuous way; the more time one ball spends in
the air relative to the time it spends in your hand, the more time you
have to deal with the other balls, and so the more balls you can juggle.
Shannon’s theorem makes this trade off in times precise.” (He also
pointed out the irony, given the rest of Shannon’s digital innovations,
that the juggling theorem’s measurement of continuous time makes it
analog.) Each side of the equation tracks a different part of the act of
juggling: the left side tracks the pattern of the balls, and the right side
tracks the pattern of the hands. Because, as Lewbel put it, “the
amount of time balls spend being juggled is the same as the time the
hands spend juggling them,” the equality is maintained.

Shannon’s work on juggling might have ended here; already he
had lent the study of juggling considerable legitimacy, and given a
generation of mathematician-jugglers the ability to combine their two
passions without fear of embarrassment. But a paper was, in this case,
insufficient. In 1983, as he had so often before, Shannon brought the
work from the world of theory into the realm of mechanics: he set out
to build his own juggling robot.
“It all started when Betty brought home a little four-inch clown,
doing a five ball shower, from the cake decorating store ($1.98). I was

both amused and bemused—amused as a long-time amateur juggler
who even as a boy wished to run away and join the circus, but
bemused by the unlikely shower pattern and the plastic connections
between the balls,” Shannon wrote.
The cake-store clown only appeared to juggle—but Shannon’s robot
actually did. Assembled from his Erector Set, the finished product was
able to handle three balls. The balls bounce off a tom-tom drum, and
the robot moves its paddle arms in a rocking motion, “each side
making a catch when it rocks down and a toss when it rocks up.”
Though Shannon never completed the bounce-juggling robot’s
counterpart—a robot that could authentically toss juggle—he still
built his own set of clowns that put on a convincing imitation. And
there was one way, he noted with pride, in which they outclassed any
human: “The greatest numbers jugglers of all time cannot sustain
their record patterns for more than a few minutes, but my little
clowns juggle all night and never drop a prop!”

30
Kyoto
For decades, honors and recognitions arrived for Shannon from
around the world. The world’s top universities conferred honorary
degrees. Societies of all sizes bestowed certificates, commendations,
and gold medals.
The boy from Gaylord was mostly amused by all the attention. As
Betty Shannon later put it, “He was a very modest guy. He got a lot of
awards but they never went to his head and he never talked about
them.” Shannon put it this way:
I don’t think I was ever motivated by the notion of winning
prizes, although I have a couple of dozen of them in the other
room. I was more motivated by curiosity. Never by the desire for
financial gain. I just wondered how things were put together. Or
what laws or rules govern a situation, or if there are theorems
about what one can’t or can do. Mainly because I wanted to
know myself.

Shannon’s indifference was on display for all to see: he had
accumulated so many honorary degrees that he hung the doctoral
hoods from a device that resembled a rotating tie rack (which,
naturally, he had built with his own hands). Whether the awarding
institutions would have found that treatment fitting or insulting, it
speaks to the lightness with which Shannon took the work of being
lauded.
Peggy’s account of those years gives the impression of parents
trying to keep their home life normal in the face of their Claude’s
fame in the mathematics world. “Then,” Peggy remembered, “the calls
would come about the honorary degrees,” cracking the thin veneer.
Try as they might to downplay and laugh off many of his
achievements, some honors made it clear even to a child that Claude
was someone important—and that, as unassuming as he was, his work
constituted something significant in the world. On the day before
Christmas 1966, it was announced that President Lyndon B. Johnson
would present Claude Shannon with the National Medal of Science, in
honor of “brilliant contributions to the mathematical theories of
communications and information processing.”
On February 6, 1967, the Shannons joined the assembled guests in
the East Room of the White House, where President Johnson
dedicated his remarks to “eleven men whose lifelong purpose has
been to explore the great ocean of truth. Their achievements—and the
work of other scientists—have lengthened man’s life, have eased his
days, and have enriched our treasury of wisdom.” It was a proud day

for the Shannon family, all of whom were in attendance. Peggy
recalled that she argued with her mother over which dress to wear,
but also remembered, as many a White House guest does, the feeling
of significance conveyed simply by setting foot in the building. She
remarked, channeling some of her father’s self-effacement, “I was
seven, so I had the eyes of a seven-year-old, and it was just a pretty
cool thing.”
LBJ gave the family the full Johnson treatment just after presenting
the award, and Vice President Hubert Humphrey’s loud laugh spooked
young Peggy into hiding behind her mother’s leg.

Among Shannon’s most cherished awards and honors were the
ones that made him laugh. There was a miniature Greek temple,
bearing

the

inscription

“MASSACHVSETTS

INSTITVTE

OF

JVGGLOLOGY” and featuring a clown juggling tiny replicas of
Shannon’s honorary diplomas. And, from the close of his fellowship at
Stanford, a very formal, university-sanctioned certificate—the bottom
of which had been graffitied with the signatures of all the other
fellows, in as large and boisterous a script as the space would allow.
Shannon even found a way to wring comedy from accepting awards.
Upon being invited to join the American Philosophical Society, he was
sent a certificate that was an obvious facsimile of calligraphy. Tickled,
Shannon hired an actual calligrapher to write a long reply accepting
membership into the society.

Not even the Oxbridge style of high academic decorum could dent
his flippancy. When he was awarded a visiting fellowship to All Souls
College in Oxford in 1978, he had the opportunity of reuniting with
John Pierce and Barney Oliver for the university’s Trinity term. The
trio, along with their fellow Bell Labs alumnus and reunion organizer
Rudi Kompfner, were expected to give a series of lectures on their
topics of research and interest—artificial intelligence, information
theory, and so on. Notes passed between Kompfner and Pierce testify
to their concern about Shannon’s willingness to deliver the lectures:
“to get something out of Claude may be the problem,” Kompfner
wrote to Pierce.
Claude was pondering a serious problem, though—or at least, a
serious problem for him. What emerged from the Oxford stint was one
of the more curious papers of Shannon’s career. Frustrated by having
to drive on the left side of the road, Shannon engineered a custombuilt solution. “The Fourth-Dimensional Twist, or a Modest Proposal
in Aid of the American Driver in England” opens with a tale of the
woes of the American driver abroad:
An American driving in England is confronted with a wild and
dangerous world. . . . With our long-ingrained driving habits the
world seemed totally mad. Cars, bicycles and pedestrians would
dart out from nowhere and we would always be looking in the
wrong direction. The car was usually filled with curses from the
men and with screams and hysterical laughter from the women
as we careened from one narrow escape to another. The

passengers were given to sudden involuntary motions—
shielding the face or slamming on non-existent brakes. The turn
indicator and windshield wiper controls were also reversed from
American practice and we found ourselves signaling turns with
the windshield wiper—fast for a right turn, slow for a left. The
whole driving situation was not particularly improved by the
narrowness of English streets and the high speed of English
drivers. Nor was our inner security increased by the predilection
of the English for building stone walls immediately adjacent to
the roads.
Shannon proposed an idea that even he admitted sounded
“grandiose

and

utterly

impractical—the

idle

dream

of

a

mathematician.” His solution was to create a fourth dimension, one
that reversed perceptions of right and left:
How will we do this? In a word, with mirrors. If you hold your
right hand in front of a mirror, the image appears as a left hand.
If you view it in a second mirror, after two reflections it appears
now as a right hand, and after three reflections again as a left
hand, and so on. Our general plan is to encompass our American
driver with mirror systems which reflect his view of England an
odd number of times. Thus he sees the world about him not as it
is but as it would be after a 180° fourth-dimensional rotation.
Finally, a series of adjustments to the steering system would
translate the American driver’s motions into British English: turning

the wheel left would make the car go right, and vice versa, et voilà.
Complete with drawings, figures, and schematics, the paper was, of
course, written with tongue firmly in cheek. But it remains the most
memorable record of Shannon’s time at Oxford. At more than 2,100
words, it was not simply a throwaway idea—it shows Shannon’s
willingness to spend hours fleshing out the implications of a joke, as
well as his imperturbable indifference to the honors that came his
way. And it speaks, perhaps, to the minor anxieties of a world traveler
who mainly found travel something to be tolerated—who would just
as soon have brought his home with him, even if only as an optical
illusion.

By the time the awards-related junkets began in earnest, the
Shannons had three children, so each trip became a chance for the
family to travel the world together. His daughter, Peggy, recalled,
“he’d get an award from Israel and the whole family went on a six- or
seven-week trip in the middle of the school year. We went to Israel
and then we went to Egypt, Turkey, and England. . . . So I was pulled
out of school for six weeks or something like that in order to do that.”
Shannon himself had mixed feelings about all of the travel. He was
a homebody and an introvert, and more important, a less-thanadventurous eater. His tastes ran to home-cooked meat and potatoes,
and the problem of finding the closest foreign equivalent caused him
no small amount of anxiety. Peggy remembered that the Shannons

rarely ate out, even in Massachusetts—so the prospect of couscous in
Israel or raw fish in Japan was particularly fearsome to her father.
Nor did it help that public speaking increasingly terrified him,
especially, it seems, as he grew further removed from the work that
made his name. The confident, if occasionally scattershot, MIT
lecturer had developed a crippling stage fright—driven less, it seems,
by fear of the spotlight than by fear of having run out of interesting,
intellectually rigorous subjects to talk about. For Shannon there
would be little of the aging luminary’s pontifications and platitudes;
the standard he generally set himself was hard mathematics or
nothing.
Even sympathetic audiences and eponymous venues frightened
him. In 1973, for instance, Shannon was invited to give the first
Claude Shannon lecture in Ashkelon, Israel, for the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers Information Theory Society. “I
have never seen such stage fright,” the mathematician Elwyn
Berlekamp recalled. “It never would have occurred to me that anyone
in front of friends could be so scared.” Shannon required extensive
nerve calming in the wings and would only take the stage
accompanied by a friend. Another attendee remembered, “He just felt
that people were going to expect so much of him in this talk, and he
was afraid that he didn’t have anything significant to say. Needless to
say, he gave a fantastic talk, but in my mind . . . it showed me what a
modest man he was.”

In response to another invitation from a friend, Shannon
anticipated that he’d be asked to speak—and tried a preemptive
strike: “Since our retirement, Betty doesn’t do windows and I don’t
give talks.” Still, for all his anxieties about appearing in public,
Shannon indulged in the trips and accepted the accolades, if only
because Betty so enjoyed the chance to see the world.

In part, the invitations and recognitions kept pouring in because
the technological developments of the 1970s had awakened the world
to information theory’s importance. In the immediate aftermath of
Shannon’s “Mathematical Theory of Communication,” said an MIT
student of that era, Tom Kailath, “we always thought that information
theory would never see practical implementation. In the old days,
people studied Latin and Greek just as training for the mind.” In the
same way, young engineers in the 1950s and ’60s mainly saw
Shannon’s theory as “good training.”
And yet an increasingly digital world had begun to assimilate the
codes whose existence Shannon had first identified. On September 5,
1977, the Voyager 1 probe set out for Jupiter and Saturn, fortified
against error by one of those codes and capable of transmitting
images of the gas giants across some 746 million miles of vacuum. In
the same year, a pair of Israeli researchers, Jacob Ziv and Abraham
Lempel, devised a data compression algorithm, built on Shannon’s
coding work, that served as one of the critical backbones of later
Internet and cellular communications systems. That Ziv had been a

graduate student at MIT at the same time as Shannon was a faculty
member was, by his own later acknowledgment, critical to firing his
interest in the field.
Even

as

the

scale

of

Shannon’s

accomplishment

became

increasingly clear, “he didn’t like to boast,” remembered Arthur
Lewbel.
But every now and then . . . I remember one time I was at his
house, and he was showing me the program for an information
theory conference. He just picked it up, showed it to me, and he
pointed to the sessions. And the session was named Shannon
Theory 1, and another session he pointed to was named
Shannon Theory 2, and the sessions went up to Shannon
Theory 5.
Naturally, talk of a Nobel Prize followed Shannon for much of his
career. In 1959, he was nominated for the Nobel in physics, alongside
Norbert Wiener. Instead, physicists Emilio Gino Segrè and Owen
Chamberlain garnered that year’s award for discovering the
antiproton. The nomination for Shannon and Wiener was regarded as
a bit of a long shot, but the mere fact of a nomination reveals what
Shannon’s contemporaries thought of him. The problem with
awarding Shannon the Nobel was, in part, structural: mathematics
lacked a dedicated Nobel category of its own, a fact that had always
been something of a chip on the math world’s shoulder. Shannon
himself said as much: “You know, there’s no Nobel in mathematics,

although I think there should be.” The mathematicians who had won,
including John Nash and Max Born, had won in fields like economics
or physics; Bertrand Russell won in literature. Shannon’s work had cut
across several disciplines, but it was difficult to shoehorn into any
Nobel field; the prize would not be in his future.
In 1985, though, the Shannons received a call, not from Stockholm,
but from Kyoto. Claude had been selected as the first-ever winner of
the Kyoto Prize in Basic Science, an award endowed by the billionaire
Kazuo Inamori. Inamori was a Japanese applied chemist who founded
the multinational Kyocera and later rescued Japan Airlines from
bankruptcy. He was an engineer by training, a Zen Buddhist by choice,
and a business turnaround artist by reputation. He was a student of
management philosophy, which, along with his Buddhism, might
explain why the Kyoto Prize’s founding letter reads like a curious mix
of a spiritual text and a shareholder update:
After a quarter of a century of relentless and painstaking effort,
Kyocera’s annual sales have, by the grace of God, grown to 230
billion yen, with pre-tax profits of 53 billion yen. . . . I have
decided on this occasion to create the Kyoto Prize. . . .
Those worthy of the Kyoto Prize will be people who have, as
have we at Kyocera, worked humbly and devotedly, sparing no
effort to seek perfection in their chosen professions. They will
be individuals who are sensitive to their own human fallibility
and who thereby hold a deeply rooted reverence for
excellence. . . .

The future of humanity can be assured only through a
balance of scientific progress and spiritual depth. Though
today’s technology-based civilization is advancing rapidly, there
is a deplorable lag in inquiry into our spiritual nature. I believe
that the world is composed of mutual dichotomies—pluses and
minuses, such as the yin and the yang or darkness and light.
Only through the awareness and nourishment of both sides of
these dualisms can we achieve a complete and stable
equilibrium. . . . It is my sincere hope that the Kyoto Prize may
serve to encourage the cultivation of both our scientific and
spiritual sides.
In time, the Kyoto would acquire a measure of prestige, in part by
conspicuously styling itself as a competitor to the Nobel. Press
releases announcing the prize winners would begin: “The Kyoto Prize,
alongside the Nobel Prize one of the world’s highest honors for the
lifetime achievement of outstanding personalities in the fields of
culture and science, is being awarded this year to . . .” It even managed
to anticipate the Nobel on a number of occasions, honoring scientists
who, years later, strained to avoid repeating themselves at their
laureate lectures in Stockholm.
In presentation, too, the Kyoto ceremony would reach for Nobellike flourish and flair, with the Japanese imperial family lending itself
to the proceedings. And perhaps betraying its founder’s sense for
untapped business opportunities, the Kyoto’s categories were broad
enough to accommodate the fields the Nobel excluded—including

mathematics and engineering. The Nobel may have had an eightyfour-year head start, but the Kyoto intended to give it a run for its
money.

The Kyoto was a significant triumph for Shannon and
represented, in many ways, his career’s crowning recognition.
Shannon, as usual, was nervous about the trip, and especially
apprehensive about Japanese food. But he was joined by both Betty
and his sister, Catherine, who still shared the family passion for math:
she was a professor of mathematics at Murray State University in
Kentucky. Accompanied as he would be, in Peggy’s words, by “two
strong women,” he agreed to travel to Japan to accept the award.
Shannon’s Kyoto Prize had a lasting benefit that outlived the award
proceedings: he was required to deliver a laureate lecture, one of his
last and longest public statements, “Development of Communication
and Computing, and My Hobby.” Shannon began the lecture by
discussing history itself—or rather, the problem of how history was
taught in his home country:
I don’t know how history is taught here in Japan, but in the
United States in my college days, most of the time was spent on
the study of political leaders and wars—Caesars, Napoleons and
Hitlers. I think this is totally wrong. The important people and
events of history are the thinkers and innovators, the Darwins,

Newtons and Beethovens whose work continues to grow in
influence in a positive fashion.
One category of innovation he singled out for special mention: the
discoveries of science “are wonderful achievements in themselves, but
would not affect the life of the common man without the
intermediate efforts of engineers and inventors—people like Edison,
Bell and Marconi.” Shannon marveled at the progress of the twentieth
century, before which “people lived much as they had centuries
before, a largely agrarian society with little mobility or distant
communication.” He cited the spinning jenny, Watt’s steam engine,
the telegraph, the electric light, the radio, and the automobile—all less
than two centuries old and each one transformative. That human life
had been so utterly reshaped over a handful of life spans was largely,
he believed, the work of engineers.
Though he was rarely given to public self-reflection, Shannon
recalled the day when, as a young engineering student, he was asked
to purchase a slide rule, a log-log-duplex, “the biggest they had.”
Looking back, he remarked on how quaint the device seemed now. He
had with him on stage a handheld transistor computer made in Japan,
and it “does everything my log-log-duplex did, and much more—and
out to ten decimal places instead of three.”
Between the slide rule and the handheld computer—between the
room-sized differential analyzer and the Apple II sitting on his desk at
home—Shannon’s career had spanned a computing revolution. At

points, “the intellectual progress in computers . . .was so rapid that
they were obsolete even before they were finished.”
In a room of Japanese royalty and distinguished guests, Shannon
was giving an all-too-brief survey course of computing history, down
to the point at which Shannon himself entered the story. It was the
summation of a lifetime’s work on machines that could communicate,
think, reason, and act, and on the theoretical architecture that made
all of it possible. But computing was not only a central thread of his
life’s work. As the lecture’s title suggested, it was also, always, his
hobby—or, as he translated the word for his audience, his shumi.
“Building devices like chess-playing machines and juggling robots,
even as a ‘shumi,’ might seem a ridiculous waste of time and money,”
Shannon admitted. “But I think the history of science has shown that
valuable consequences often proliferate from simple curiosity.”
What might proliferate from such curiosities as Endgame and
Theseus?
I have great hopes in this direction for machines that will rival
or even surpass the human brain. This area, known as artificial
intelligence, has been developing for some thirty or forty years.
It is now taking on commercial importance. For example, within
a mile of MIT, there are seven different corporations devoted to
research in this area, some working on parallel processing. It is
difficult to predict the future, but it is my feeling that by 2001
AD we will have machines which can walk as well, see as well,
and think as well as we do.

But even before this convergence of human and machine
intelligence had come to pass, machines were still a rich source of
analogies for understanding the subtleties of our own minds:
Incidentally, a communication system is not unlike what is
happening right here. I am the source and you are the receiver.
The translator is the transmitter who is applying a complicated
operation to my American message to make it suitable for
Japanese ears. This transformation is difficult enough with
straight factual material, but becomes vastly more difficult with
jokes and double entendres. I could not resist the temptation to
include a number of these to put the translator on his mettle.
Indeed, I am planning to take a tape of his translation to a
second translator, and have it translated back into English.
We information theorists get a lot of laughs this way.

31
The Illness

She is leaving him, not all at once, which would be painful enough,
but in a wrenching succession of separations. One moment she is
here, and then she is gone again, and each journey takes her a
little farther from his reach. He cannot follow her, and he wonders
where she goes when she leaves.
—Debra Dean

To friends, the first noticeable signs of the disease came in the early
1980s. Initially, they noticed that he struggled to answer familiar
questions. Then came the brief lapses in memory. In the earliest
stages, some friends thought nothing of it. Shannon’s achievements,
after all, had been triumphs of intuition and analysis, not memory or
recall. As Robert Gallager put it, “Claude was never a person who
depended a great deal on memory, because one of the things that
made him brilliant was his ability to draw such wonderful conclusions
from very, very simple models. What that meant was that, if he was
failing a little bit, you wouldn’t notice it.” That he was beginning to

forget things was, to many of those closest to him, simply a sign that
he was succumbing to the normal hazards of age.
Soon, though, he was forgetting the way home from the grocery
store and unable to remember phone numbers, names, faces. His hand
began to quiver when he wrote. Peggy Shannon remembered one day
when the family was hosting the Juggling Club. She was sitting on the
floor, her father in a chair nearby. He looked at her, paused, and
asked, “Do you juggle?”
“I was just floored,” she recalled. “Is it that he doesn’t know who I
am or that he doesn’t remember that I juggle? Either one of them
would be totally devastating.”
By then, the marked change in Claude was undeniable. “In 1983, he
went to a doctor,” Betty said, “and the decision was that he probably
was in the very, very early stages of Alzheimer’s.”
The Shannons began to be more deliberate about which travel
invitations they accepted and which they rejected. At a 1986 event at
the University of Michigan, Shannon was “very quiet,” noted organizer
David Neuhoff. “I had the feeling at that time that he was already
suffering from the affliction of Alzheimer’s. Betty did most of the
talking.” Decisions about how much travel to attempt or how much
information to reveal about Shannon’s illness fell to Betty, who
desired to keep a cone of privacy around the family. “They felt like
they’d earned the right to be private,” Peggy Shannon recalled.
The family worked to keep his mind engaged, but the disease took
its toll. Shannon lost a great deal of cognitive function very quickly,

and the challenges of caring for someone with Alzheimer’s put a
heavy burden on Betty. “She was the primary caretaker,” Peggy
remembered. “And he would wander. We lived on a busy street. It’s
scary, to watch your partner have an illness like this.”
The Shannons entered an Alzheimer’s study at a local hospital, with
Betty serving as the control. On whether Shannon knew what was
happening to him, Peggy remarked, “There were days he knew, days
he didn’t. . . . All I can say is when I saw him, there were times it was
the same old dad; there were times when he was really out of it.”
Watching him go, she said simply, was “mostly heartbreaking.”
In too-brief moments, the family was given a flash of the Claude
they knew. Peggy remembered that she “actually had a conversation
with him in 1992 about . . . graduate school programs and what
problems I might pursue. And I remember being just amazed how he
could cut to the core of the questions I was thinking about, I was like,
‘Wow, even in his compromised state he still has that ability.’ ”
But they were only momentary beams of light in the thickening fog.
Within a few years, Shannon’s gaps became more pronounced, his
moments of clarity fewer and further between. In 1993, remembered
Robert Fano, “I asked him something about the past, nothing
technical or mathematical, and Claude just answered, ‘I don’t
remember.’ ” It is one of the cruelties of Shannon’s life that a disease
of the mind was the cause of his decline. Friends and loved ones
lamented that fact nearly as much as they lamented the reality that
he would be gone soon.

There was also the more acute unfairness in the fact that, just after
he was diagnosed, the digital world he had helped to bring about came
into full flower. “Oddly enough, I don’t think he even realized what it
turned into. . . . He would have been absolutely astounded,” Betty said.
And he would surely have been pleased by the 1993 announcement of
codes whose speed finally approached, but did not break, the
Shannon Limit, had the news found any purchase on him.
From 1983 to 1993, Shannon continued to live at Entropy House
and carry on as well as he could. Perhaps it says something about the
depth of his character that, even in the last stages of his decline,
much of his natural personality remained intact. “The sides of his
personality that seemed to get stronger were the sweet, boyish,
playful sides. . . . We were lucky,” Peggy noted. The games and
tinkering continued, if at a more measured pace. Arthur Lewbel
recalled one of his last interactions with Shannon:
The last time I saw Claude, Alzheimer’s disease had gotten the
upper hand. As sad as it is to see anyone’s light slowly fade, it is
an especially cruel fate to be suffered by a genius. He vaguely
remembered I juggled, and cheerfully showed me the juggling
displays in his toy room, as if for the first time. And despite the
loss of memory and reason, he was every bit as warm, friendly,
and cheerful as the first time I met him.
In 1993, Shannon fell, broke his hip, and had to be hospitalized.
The cycle of rehabilitation and acute care was lengthy, a grueling

period in which the question of what would come next was foremost
in the minds of the family. For Betty, Claude was to stay at home
—“home was a real refuge for her,” Peggy said—and she began to
prepare one of the rooms of Entropy House, outfitting it with a
hospital bed and other essentials. But Betty herself was getting older,
and her daughter had a sense that the challenge of caring for her
father might be too much to handle. She urged her mother to consider
an assisted living facility, and though she left the final decision up to
her, she was relieved when her mom agreed to move Claude to
Courtyard Nursing Care Center, roughly three miles from Winchester.
For Betty, her husband’s distance from the house changed nothing:
she remained utterly committed to him and his care, and she visited
twice each and every day. Her daughter, Peggy, was moved to observe
that “she was very devoted. She wanted to make sure he had the
proper care. She also missed him. He had been the center of her life
and that continued even when he moved into the home.” For Claude,
these visits became treasured events. Betty said, “at noon I’d go over
and nurses would line up on a bench waiting for me because when I
came in his face would light up and he would grin. I thought that was
pretty good.”
Other family visited from time to time, and the nursing home staff
offered him simple arithmetic problems to help him pass the time.
Shannon also remained a tinkerer through even his last days; he set to
taking apart his walker, imagining a better design all the way. “He still
liked to take things apart and figure how they worked,” Betty said. He

had maintained use of his body and hands, and he tapped his fingers
to music. “He was ambulatory . . . and he could walk around and see
the rest of the place and see what was going on, but certainly, his
mind was not there.” But his being able to move and function at a
minimal level proved a bit risky. “They had to be careful with him
because he would try the staircase in the nursing home, and go
walking down the staircase, even though he had a walker with him. He
would go outside and they had to go looking for him.”
Ultimately, his movements became impaired, and once-simple
things—talking, feeding himself—became difficult. Claude Shannon
died on February 24, 2001. His brain was donated for Alzheimer’s
research. His funeral was held at Lane Funeral Home in Winchester, a
small affair.
Years earlier, Shannon had set his mind to the question of this
funeral—and imagined something very different. For him, it was an
occasion that called for humor, not grief. In a rough sketch, he
outlined a grand procession, a Macy’s–style parade to amuse and
delight, and to sum up the life of Claude Shannon. The clarinetist Pete
Fountain would lead the way, jazz combo in tow. Next in line: six
unicycling pallbearers, somehow balancing Shannon’s coffin (labeled
in the sketch as “6 unicyclists/1 loved one”). Behind them would come
the “Grieving Widow,” then a juggling octet and a “juggling octopedal
machine.” Next would be three black chess pieces bearing $100 bills
and “3 rich men from the West”—California tech investors—following
the money. They would march in front of a “Chess Float,” atop which

British chess master David Levy would square off in a live match
against a computer. Scientists and mathematicians, “4 cats trained by
Skinner methods,” the “mouse group,” a phalanx of joggers, and a 417instrument band would bring up the rear.
This proved impractical. And his family, understandably, preferred
a tamer memorial. Shannon was laid to rest in Cambridge, along the
Begonia Path in Mount Auburn Cemetery.
Yet in a cemetery home to Supreme Court justices, governors,
presidents of universities, and many other famed thinkers, statesmen,
and scientists, Shannon’s gravestone is unique. An unsuspecting
visitor would see SHANNON engraved in pale gray marble and move on.
What’s concealed, however, is a message on the reverse: covered by a
bush, the open section of the marble on the back of the tombstone
holds Shannon’s entropy formula. Shannon’s children had hoped the
formula would grace the front of the stone; their mother thought it
more modest to engrave it on the back.
And so Claude Shannon’s resting place is marked by a kind of code:
a message hidden from view, invisible except to those looking for it.

32
Aftershocks

The true spirit of delight, the exaltation, the sense of being more
than man, which is the touchstone of the highest excellence, is to
be found in mathematics as surely as in poetry.
—Bertrand Russell

The New York Times ran his obituary. Busts and statues were
commissioned. A building at the Bell Labs campus was renamed for
him. And, then, as far as the general public was concerned, Claude
Shannon faded from memory.
His deepest legacy, in some sense, wasn’t the one he owned, but the
one woven into the work of others—his students, his admirers, later
information theorists, engineers, and mathematicians. They kept his
memory very much alive, and they did so in the specialist journals in
which Shannon made his name. The pens of his fellow engineers and
information theorists produced many heartfelt remembrances,
recollections that continue even to this day. “A uniquely playful and
gentle American genius,” one writer noted. “Shannon radiated . . . a

powerful inherent intellectual light,” wrote another. Yet another
writer, who never met Shannon, confessed that at the age of nine he
happened upon Shannon’s master’s thesis—which convinced him to
choose a life in mathematics right then and there.
Partly, the reflections were possible because many of the writers
had a rare experience in the world of science—that of sharing time on
earth with the person who gave birth to their field. But it was more
than that: Shannon’s work left its lasting mark on generations of
American engineers and mathematicians, in part, because it resonated
with their fundamental values.
What were those values? Simplicity matters. Elegant math was
forceful math. Inessential items, superfluous writing, extra work—all
of them should be discarded. In his way of approaching mathematics
as an exercise in getting down to the essentials, Shannon produced
work that would be regarded as remarkably self-contained, polished,
intuitive, and, of course, brilliant—on par with F=ma or E=mc2. A
group of Russian mathematicians wrote that in Shannon’s work, “the
logical and natural development of sections into each other makes an
impression that the problem is developing itself.” They called this
impression the mathematical virtue of “integrity,” the sense that a
Shannon paper is a seamless whole. Still another of Shannon’s
contemporaries put it more poetically: “[His] ideas form a beautiful
symphony, with repetition of themes and growing power that still
form an inspiration to all of us. This is mathematics at its very best.”

In 1948, Shannon’s theoretical work posed as many questions as
it answered. But the value of that challenge shouldn’t be
underestimated. There was the far-off prospect of the Shannon Limit,
which would prove increasingly useful decades later; even now, the
limit remains the tantalizing outer edge of communication, a goal that
engineers continue to chase. But those were the narrow, practical
elements. The striking feature of his paper is the reverberation, the
way in which it inaugurated an entire field of study, a body of
dialogue and deliberation that would long outlive its author. “It was
like an earthquake and the aftershocks haven’t finished yet!”
observed Anthony Ephremides, an information theorist of a later era.
Few papers can claim an impact so enduring (it has more than 91,000
citations and counting!), and it’s no exaggeration to say that, though
information theory had important antecedents prior to Shannon, the
formal study of information begins in earnest with his work. As one
writer would put it, many decades later, “For many scientists,
Shannon’s discovery was the equivalent of waking up and finding
marble on their doorsteps.”
The marble he unearthed would be carved by others; Shannon’s
work condemned him, to some extent, to a legacy as an antecedent.
He is one of the authors of the information architecture that now
binds the planet—but he will likely never approach the name
recognition of a Steve Jobs or Bill Gates. Beyond his own aversion to
such attention, his anonymity could be chalked up to the distance
between his work and the technologies we use every day. When a

world-class engineer says that “all the advanced signal processing that
enables us to send high-speed data was done as an outgrowth of
Claude Shannon’s work on information theory,” the statement rings
true to people in the know—and means very little to the untrained.
Yet there is value in rethinking Claude Shannon—but not in the
way we’d imagine. Consider him not only as a distant forefather of the
digital era, but as one of the great creative generalists of the twentieth
century: not solely as someone who laid the foundation of the
Information Age, but as someone who trained a powerful intellect on
topics of deep interest, and continued to do so beyond the point of
short-term practicality.
What can we learn from that Claude Shannon?

For one thing, Shannon’s body of work is a useful corrective to
our era of unprecedented specialization. His work is wide-ranging in
the best sense, and perhaps more than any twentieth-century
intellect of comparable stature, he resists easy categorization. Was he
a mathematician? Yes. Was he an engineer? Yes. Was he a juggler,
unicyclist, machinist, futurist, and gambler? Yes, and then some.
Shannon never acknowledged the contradictions in his fields of
interest; he simply went wherever his omnivorous curiosity led him.
So it was entirely consistent for him to jump from information theory
to artificial intelligence to chess to juggling to gambling—it simply
didn’t occur to him that investing his talents in a single field made
any sense at all.

There were links from field to field, of course. And it goes without
saying that Shannon understood the bridges between his work in
information theory and his work on robotics and investing and
computer chess. Few have had a better intuitive sense of how the
information revolution would fundamentally alter our world in all its
aspects. But that sense led Shannon to choose exploration rather than
specialization. He could have continued to trade on the success of
information theory for decades. By the time he arrived at MIT, though,
his attention was elsewhere. Students of that era recall that Shannon
himself just didn’t seem especially engaged by information theoretic
questions and problems; however, if you brought him something in
robotics or artificial intelligence, they recalled, his ears perked up and
he paid special attention.
The great Russian mathematician Andrey Kolmogorov put it like
this in 1963:
In our age, when human knowledge is becoming more and more
specialized, Claude Shannon is an exceptional example of a
scientist who combines deep abstract mathematical thought
with a broad and at the same time very concrete understanding
of vital problems of technology. He can be considered equally
well as one of the greatest mathematicians and as one of the
greatest engineers of the last few decades.
This indifference to seeming contradictions extended to the way he
lived his life. He had the option of worldwide fame, yet he preferred to

remain largely anonymous. He wrote pathbreaking papers, then,
unsatisfied with their present state, postponed them indefinitely in
favor of more pressing curiosities. He made himself wealthy by
studying the movements of markets and the potential of start-ups,
yet he lived with conspicuous modesty. He reached the heights of the
ivory tower, with all the laurels and professorial chairs to prove it, but
felt no shame playing games built for children and writing tracts on
juggling.

He

was

passionately

curious,

but

also,

at

times,

unapologetically lazy. He was among the most productive, honored
minds of his era, and yet he gave the appearance that he would chuck
it all overboard for the chance to tinker in his gadget room.

His style of work was characterized by such lightness and levity, in
fact, that we can sometimes forget the depth and difficulty of the
problems he took on. For all the fun he was having, Shannon tackled
some of the most significant scientific questions of his era and
worked at the boundaries of math, computer science, and engineering
—in some cases helping to firm up what the boundaries were! As AI
pioneer Marvin Minsky said on the news of Shannon’s death, “For
him, the harder a problem might seem, the better the chance to find
something new.”
Such an approach took courage—a quality about Shannon captured
in the words of one of his Bell Labs office mates, Richard Hamming. In
a now-famous talk called “You and Your Research,” Hamming outlines
for a group of students the attributes that make for first-rate research

in mathematics and other disciplines. He singles out Shannon for
special mention, and notes that part of what gave Shannon’s work
force was his bravery:
Courage is one of the things that Shannon had supremely. You
have only to think of his major theorem. He wants to create a
method of coding, but he doesn’t know what to do so he makes
a random code. Then he is stuck. And then he asks the
impossible question, “What would the average random code
do?” He then proves that the average code is arbitrarily good,
and that therefore there must be at least one good code. Who
but a man of infinite courage could have dared to think those
thoughts? That is the characteristic of great scientists; they
have courage. They go forward under incredible circumstances;
they think and continue to think.
We don’t usually associate the fields of mathematics or engineering
with the ancient virtue of courage. But Shannon’s wasn’t the usual
contribution to those fields, either, and though he surely would have
been the last to admit this, it took a great deal of daring to think as
Shannon thought and to live as Shannon lived. All of this also had an
effect on those around him, including his students. “When you work
with someone like Shannon, you expand your horizons, you try to
reach far,” remarked Len Kleinrock.

Importantly, his courage was joined to an ego so self-contained
and self-sufficient that it looked, from certain angles, like the absence
of ego. This was the keystone quality of Shannon, the one that
enabled all the others. At almost every opportunity for selfpromotion,

Shannon

demurred.

Mathematicians

worry

about

spending time on problems of insufficient difficulty, what they
derisively call “toy problems”; Claude Shannon worked with actual
toys in public! Time and again, he pursued projects that might have
caused others embarrassment, engaged questions that seemed trivial
or minor, then managed to wring the breakthroughs out of them. It
takes no small degree of self-assurance to try to build a brain that
would outclass one’s own—or, for that matter, to build a machine
whose only function is to turn itself off.
And that is connected, we think, to the other great hallmark of
Shannon’s life: the value of finding joy in work. We expect our
greatest minds to bear the deepest scars; we prefer our geniuses
tortured. But with the exception of a few years in his twenties when
Shannon passed through what seems like a moody, possibly even
depressive, stage, his life and work seemed to be one continuous
game. He was, at once, abnormally brilliant and normally human.
He did none of this consciously; he wasn’t straining to give the
appearance of fun. Shannon simply delighted in the various
curiosities that grabbed his attention, and the testimony of those
around him suggests that it was a delight that, like his mind, was
polymorphous. He could find himself lost in the intricacies of an

engineering problem, and then, just as suddenly, become captivated
by a chess position. He had a flair for the dramatic and the artistic; we
see it in the flaming trumpet, Theseus the mouse, a flagpole he handcarved out of an oversize tree on his property, the juggling clowns he
built to exacting specifications. Shannon’s admirers are just as quick
to compare him to M. C. Escher or Lewis Carroll as they are to put him
in the company of Albert Einstein or Isaac Newton. He turned arid
and technical sciences into vast and captivating puzzles, the solving of
which was play of the adult kind. It says something about Claude
Shannon and his instinct for play that his work found its way into
both the pages of journals and the halls of museums.
In one sense, it may be impossible to draw anything from this.
Shannon’s enjoyment seems sui generis. But perhaps his example can
still remind us of the vast room for lightness in fields usually
discussed in sober tones. These days it’s rare to talk about math and
science as opportunities to revel in discovery. We speak, instead,
about their practical benefits—to society, the economy, our prospects
for employment. STEM courses are the means to job security, not joy.
Studying them becomes the academic equivalent of eating your
vegetables—something valuable, and state sanctioned, but vaguely
distasteful.
This seems, at least to us, not as Shannon would have wanted it.
Shannon was an engineer—a man more attuned to practicality than
most—and yet he was drawn to the idea that knowledge was valuable
for its own sake and that discovery was pleasurable in its own right.

As he himself put it, “I’ve been more interested in whether a problem
is exciting than what it will do.” One of his contemporaries, remarking
on the peculiarity of a world-class mathematician with a serious
interest in unicycles, put Shannon’s love of these strange machines
specifically, as well as his passions generally, in perspective: “He was
not interested in forming a company to build unicycles. He was
interested in finding out what made unicycles fun and finding out
more about them.”
And his approach inspired a generation of remarkable innovation.
Consider the words of Bob Gallager, describing the mood of the minds
working on information theory around the same time as Shannon:
Shannon’s puzzle-solving research style was in full swing when I
was an MIT graduate student. Intellectualism was in the air.
Everyone wanted to understand mathematics and physics as
well as communication. Starting companies, making millions,
developing real applications was secondary. There was interest
in bringing the theory closer to reality, but it was theory-based.
Our role models were relaxed, curious, and had time to reflect.
We might be hard-pressed to find an academic department today
fitting that description—but surely it is a worthwhile ambition.

Toward the end of his life, Shannon still maintained his cheekiness,
his insouciance toward even the highest of the highbrow. After
promising Scientific American his article on the physics of juggling, his

attention drifted—and he chanced on an entirely unrelated project.
From that came this note to his editor, written in 1981:
Dear Dennis:
You probably think I have been fritterin’, I say fritterin’, away my
time while my juggling paper is languishing on the shelf. This is
only half true. I have come to two conclusions recently:
1) I am a better poet than scientist.
2) Scientific American should have a poetry column.
You may disagree with both of these, but I enclose “A Rubric on
Rubik Cubics” for you.
Sincerely,
Claude E. Shannon
P.S. I am still working on the juggling paper.
What followed was a seventy-line poem on the subject of Rubik’s
cubes, “sung to ‘Ta-Ra-Ra! Boom-De-Ay!’ (with an eight bar chorus)”
and complete with footnotes. And it was clear from the rhyme and
rhythm that the author had spent time playing with the words on his
tongue, rearranging them in his head, singing them aloud to himself.
The project was seriously unserious.
And the juggling article? Like so many artifacts of Shannon’s mind,
it acquired dust. Shannon’s attention had shifted, and whatever he

needed to say about juggling had been said, at least to his satisfaction.
He did, however, have one regret about the episode. He was
disappointed that his poem never made it into the pages of Scientific
American.
Laughing, he declared, “That’s one of my great works!”

Photographs

1
Born in 1862 in New Jersey, Claude Shannon’s father, Claude Elwood Shannon Sr., worked as
a furniture salesman, funeral director, and probate judge. Claude’s mother, born Mabel Wolf,

was the daughter of a German immigrant; she was a teacher and school principal. Their 1909
wedding announcement was front-page news in Gaylord, testament both to the town’s
smallness and the Shannons’ active roles in the community.

2
By the time Claude Shannon took this registration photo for the University of Michigan, he
was already an accomplished tinkerer. His creations included a makeshift elevator, a backyard
trolley, and a telegraph system that sent coded messages along a barbed-wire fence.

3
Shannon appears to have taken after his grandfather David Shannon Jr., the proud owner of
U.S. Patent No. 407,130, a series of improvements on the washing machine. For a boy of
Claude Jr.’s mechanical bent, a certified inventor in the family tree was something to brag
about.

4
The University of Michigan’s College of Engineering had grown dramatically in the years
before Shannon’s arrival. At one of its public exhibitions, students “surprised their visitors by
sawing wood with a piece of paper running at 20,000 revolutions per minute, freezing flowers
in liquid air, and showing a bottle supported only by two narrow wires from which a full
stream of water flowed—a mystery solved by few.” Michigan’s engineering buildings were
fitted out for heavy industry. They included this foundry . . .

5
. . . and this naval tank, where students tested the hydrodynamics of model ships.

6
In the spring of 1934, at the age of seventeen, Claude Shannon claimed his first publication
credit, on page 191 of the American Mathematical Monthly. Shannon’s contribution was the
solution to a math puzzle. That he was reading such a journal at all hints at more than the
usual attention paid to academic matters; that his solution was chosen points to more than
the usual talent.

7
The campus of MIT, where Shannon first made his name as an engineer, was a compromise
between architects: a classical dome sitting atop tunnels built for “efficiency and avoidance of
lost motion by student and teacher, equal to that which obtains in our best industrial works.”
It was part temple and part factory.

8
At MIT, Shannon joined a team dedicated to managing the differential analyzer: an allpurpose mechanical computer capable of bringing the force of calculus to bear on the
industrial problems of power transmission or telephone networks, or on the advanced physics
problems of cosmic rays and subatomic particles. The project followed in the footsteps of the
wizard-bearded physicist William Thomson, Lord Kelvin, who built an early mechanical
computer in 1876.

9
At MIT, Shannon trained as a pilot in his spare time. The professor who taught the flying
class urged MIT’s president to ban him from taking further lessons: such a brain was too
valuable to risk in a crash. The president refused: “Somehow I doubt the advisability of urging
a young man to refrain from flying or arbitrarily to take the opportunity away from him, on
the ground of his being intellectually superior.”

10
The differential analyzer: a brain the size of a room that could whir away at a problem for
days and nights on end. “It was a fearsome thing of shafts, gears, strings, and wheels rolling
on disks—but it worked.”

11
Vannevar Bush was, by most accounts, the most powerful scientist in mid-twentieth-century
America. He presided over the differential analyzer at MIT, advised presidents, and led
America’s scientists through World War II. Collier’s magazine called him “the man who may
win or lose the war”; Time, “the general of physics.” And not least among these
accomplishments was this: he became Claude Shannon’s first and most influential mentor.

12
Traveling to Cold Spring Harbor in the summer of 1939, Shannon arrived at one of the
greatest genetics laboratories in America, and one of the greatest scientific embarrassments:
the Eugenics Record Office. It housed a treasury of genetic data, which Shannon drew on for
his dissertation on theoretical genetics.

13
Shannon’s fellowship at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton was prestigious, but
less than gratifying: it saw the breakdown of his first marriage and his growing fears about the
WWII draft, though it also included a number of run-ins with Albert Einstein.

14
This was the Bell Labs complex as seen from Washington Street in Manhattan’s West Village
in 1936. “People did very well at Bell Labs,” recalled one of Shannon’s colleagues, “when they
did what others thought was impossible.” Shannon signed up for a full-time job when its
offices were still in lower Manhattan, near the site of the present-day High Line.

15
Claude Shannon and his colleague Dave Hagelbarger at work at Bell Labs. As another
colleague would remark about that time at Bell: “Here I am, I’ve got the world’s knowledge in
electrical engineering at my beck and call. All I’ve got to do is pick up the phone or go see
somebody and I can get the answer.”

16
Thornton Fry founded the Labs’ math group and assigned Shannon to it. “Mathematicians are
queer people,” he once said. “That’s a fact. So that anybody who was queer enough that you
didn’t know what to do with him, you said, ‘This fellow is a mathematician. Let’s have him
transferred over to Fry.’ ”

17
Along with Barney Oliver, Shannon and John Pierce (pictured here) formed a genius clique of
three at the Labs. As a contemporary joked, “the three of those people were intellectually
insufferable.”

18
In Manhattan, Shannon was a bachelor—after the end of his brief first marriage—with a small
Greenwich Village apartment and a demanding job. He kept odd hours, played music too loud,
and relished the New York jazz scene.

19

As part of the “scientists’ war” against Nazi Germany, Shannon contributed to research on
cryptography, antiaircraft fire control, and SIGSALY (pictured here), the most ambitious
speech-scrambling system of its day.

20
No one was more influential to Shannon’s work on information theory than Ralph Hartley.
His 1927 paper on the “Transmission of Information” was the closest approach to date to
capturing the essence of information, explaining how scientists might begin to think of it
physically rather than psychologically.

21
Before Shannon’s 1948 “A Mathematical Theory of Communication,” a century of common
sense and engineering trial and error said that noise—the physical world’s tax on our
messages—had to be lived with. Shannon proved that noise could be defeated, that
information sent from Point A could be received with perfection at Point B, not just often,
but essentially always. He gave engineers the conceptual tools to digitize information and
send it flawlessly, a result considered hopelessly utopian up until the moment Shannon
proved it was not.

22
After 1948, Shannon was heralded by the media as a noteworthy figure in the world of
science. He gave television interviews, was written up in national publications, and received
honorary degrees.

23
In 1948, Claude Shannon struck up a conversation with Betty Moore, a fellow Bell Labs
employee, and summoned the courage to ask her out to dinner. That dinner led to a second,
the second to a third, until they were dining together every night.

24
Claude and Betty Shannon’s courtship was efficient: they met in the fall of 1948, and by early
1949, Claude had proposed—in his “not very formal” way, as Betty recalled. She shared not
only his sense of humor but his love of math—the foundation of a partnership that would last
the rest of Claude’s life.

25
Betty purchased Claude’s first unicycle, sparking his lifelong fascination with the machines.
He would build and customize unicycles of his own, ride them through the narrow Bell Labs
hallways, and impress visitors with his agility.

26
Even at the height of his scientific celebrity, Shannon remained a tinkerer. His most famous
creation, Theseus, was an artificial, maze-solving mouse that could “learn” the location of a
metallic piece of cheese. (When the cheese was removed, Theseus could only wander the
maze aimlessly. As another scientist observed, “It is all too human.”)

27

28

Bell Labs’ Murray Hill campus, “where the future, which is what we now happen to call the
present, was conceived and designed.”

29
Shannon built one of the world’s earliest chess-playing machines. Completed in 1949,
Shannon’s machine handled six pieces and focused on the game’s final moves. More than 150
relay switches were used to calculate a move, processing power that allowed the machine to
decide within a respectable ten to fifteen seconds.

30
“I’m a machine and you’re a machine, and we both think, don’t we?”

31
Shannon set four goals for artificial intelligence to achieve by 2001: a chess-playing program
that was crowned world champion, a poetry program that had a piece accepted by the New
Yorker, a mathematical program that proved the elusive Riemann hypothesis, and, “most
important,” a stock-picking program that outperformed the prime rate by 50 percent. “These
goals,” he said only half-jokingly, “could mark the beginning of a phase-out of the stupid,
entropy-increasing, and militant human race in favor of a more logical, energy conserving,
and friendly species—the computer.”

32
Norbert Wiener (pictured in the center with Shannon and MIT president Julius Stratton on
the left) was a former child prodigy, the inventor of “cybernetics,” and the only scientist who
could plausibly challenge Shannon’s claim to have founded information theory.

33
Claude and Betty purchased a house in Winchester, Massachusetts, a bedroom community
eight miles north of MIT. Built in 1858, the house was constructed for Ellen Dwight, a great-

granddaughter of Thomas Jefferson. Originally seated on twelve acres, its design was inspired
by Monticello.

34
On a trip to Russia, Shannon offered a friendly chess game to a Soviet champion, Mikhail
Botvinnik. Botvinnik only took a serious interest in the game when Shannon managed to win
the favorable exchange of his knight and a pawn for Botvinnik’s rook. After forty-two moves,
Shannon tipped his king over, conceding the match. But lasting dozens of moves against
Botvinnik, considered among the most gifted chess players of all time, earned Shannon
lifelong bragging rights.

35
In 1957, Shannon returned to MIT as a professor. He attracted somewhat less than his share
of graduate students: as one observed, “You had to have a pretty big ego to ask someone like
Shannon to supervise you!”

36
On February 6, 1967, President Lyndon B. Johnson presented Claude Shannon with the
National Medal of Science in honor of his “brilliant contributions to the mathematical
theories of communications and information processing.”

37
Shannon’s early MIT lectures on information theory attracted packed houses, but none drew
a bigger crowd than his talk on the stock market, which he delivered to an overflowing crowd
in the university’s largest lecture hall.

38
In Massachusetts, Professor Shannon grew a beard and took up jogging. He also fully indulged
his tinkering habit: many of his best-known creations were devised in an extensive home
workshop.

39
What was arguably world’s first wearable computer was developed by Shannon and Edward
Thorp to calculate roulette odds. After several successful test runs at Las Vegas casinos, they
abandoned the project out of fear of provoking a run-in with the Mafia.

40
Assembled from Shannon’s erector set and modeled on W. C. Fields, this robot could bouncejuggle three balls. The balls rebounded off a tom-tom drum, and the robot moved its paddle
arms in a rocking motion, “each side making a catch when it rocks down and a toss when it
rocks up.”

41
Shannon was both a skilled juggler himself and the author of the first serious paper on the
mathematics of juggling. He wrote that his readers should “try not to forget the poetry, the
comedy and the music of juggling. . . . Does this sound pretentious?”

42
Shannon kept up his unicycling hobby well into his later years.

43
Shannon’s was a life spent in pursuit of curious, serious play; he was that rare scientific
genius who was just as content rigging up a juggling robot or a flamethrowing trumpet as he
was pioneering digital circuits.

44

45
Shannon delighted in the curiosities that grabbed his attention. He could find himself lost in
the intricacies of an engineering problem, and then, just as suddenly, become captivated by a
chess position. He turned arid and technical sciences into vast and captivating puzzles, the
solving of which was play of the adult kind.

Acknowledgments

This book could have been written in two ways: downward, or upward.
A book like this is written downward when it’s the work of an expert,
straining to send a decipherable message to the rest of us without
dumbing down, struggling to remember what it must have been like to
be a novice. A book like this is written upward when it’s the work of
learners, struggling to communicate what they are learning, as part of
the very process of learning it. Books of the first kind come from the
satisfaction of already knowing. Books of the second kind come from
what physicist and bon vivant Richard Feynman called the pleasure of
finding things out.
Each model has its attractions and its failings, but this has been a
book of the second kind, a book written upward. We are biographers,
not mathematicians or physicists or engineers. The best we can say
for this inexpert book of ours is that we’ve tried to write as we’d like
to live. That is, we began with a nagging sense that there is something
harmful in using without understanding, or at least trying to
understand. We began with the idea that there is something
ungrateful and grasping in enjoying our bounty of information
without bothering to understand how it got here.

We are not the first to live with that sense, nor to try to remedy it.
Here is how Arthur Koestler, a physics student turned novelist, once
put it:
Modern man lives isolated in his artificial environment, not
because the artificial is evil as such, but because of his lack of
comprehension of the forces which make it work—of the
principles which relate his gadgets to the forces of nature, to the
universal order. It is not central heating which makes his
existence “unnatural,” but his refusal to take an interest in the
principles behind it. By being entirely dependent on science, yet
closing his mind to it, he leads the life of an urban barbarian.
We would add: it is not the Internet that is unnatural, nor our feast
of information, but a refusal to consider what their origins are, how
and why they are here, where they sit in the flow of our history, and
what kinds of men and women brought them about. We think there is
something of an obligation in beginning to learn these things. We
think that the honor our subject would have cared about—if he cared
at all—would not have been adulation, but a bit of comprehension.
We’ve had great help in fulfilling this obligation. Dan Kimerling is a
friend and entrepreneur—and someone who, no doubt, Shannon
would have admired. He first suggested the idea of a biography of
Claude Shannon. It may have been the casual remark of a friend
(accompanied by a book about Bell Labs), but it has led to the work
you hold in your hands. So for that inspiration, we are grateful to Dan.

For believing in us from the start and for seeing the value in this
project when it was simply an idea in our minds, we are indebted to
Laura Yorke, our agent. She encouraged us to pitch only the faintest
of ideas to none other than Alice Mayhew and prodded us at the right
times to bring this book to pass. She is a legend in the book business
and deservedly so!
No one has a keener sense of a book’s possibilities than Simon &
Schuster’s Alice Mayhew. She, too, is legendary, and now we
understand why. Among the many blessings of the last few years, the
foremost is having her as the editor of this book. She had boundless
faith in this work, even and especially in the moments when our own
faith wavered. As she has for a generation of biographers, she brought
out our best. For that, and for her peerless editing, we are eternally
grateful. We are grateful as well to Stuart Roberts on her team for all
he did to make this project a success. Stuart is as smart, patient, and
kind as they come, and there’s good reason why he is Alice Mayhew’s
right hand.
Jon Gertner, author of The Idea Factory, inspired this project
unknowingly and then collaborated on it generously. He responded to
queries consequential and not, offered contacts and research, and
shared an unpublished oral history of Thornton Fry and the Bell Labs
mathematics group that proved critically useful. He was that most
valuable guide for a writer of historical narrative: someone who has
walked the same path before and knows where the dead ends are. He
was generous enough to point them out to us, and we are deeply

grateful for his kindness. (Oh, and if the reader hasn’t already read his
book The Idea Factory, we strongly recommend it. There is not a
better history of Bell Labs, and few better portraits of how innovative
organizations come to be built.) Also invaluable to us as guides to
Shannon’s life and work were James Gleick’s The Information and
Erico Marui Guizzo’s master’s thesis, “The Essential Message.”
Johannah-King Slutzky proved a first-rate research assistant.
Finding people outside of the worlds of science and engineering who
know Shannon’s name is difficult; finding someone like Johannah—
who had written her own piece about Shannon before she started
working on this project—was a real stroke of luck. She was diligent,
thoughtful, and as excited about the research as we were.
Professor

Sergio

Verdú,

of

Princeton

University,

was

an

indispensable guide to the world of information theory and brought
his collegiality and thoughtfulness to our every interaction. His
enthusiasm for the arcana of Shannon’s life kept us motivated
throughout the project, and he devotedly read every page and fixed
many errors. As we write this, he and filmmaker Mark Levinson (of
Particle Fever fame) are at work on a documentary on Shannon. We
have no doubt that it will be marvelous.
We connected with Dr. Alex Magoun late in the life cycle of this
project—but boy, are we glad we did! He provided his own copyedit
and corrected many errors in the draft. That he read with both an
enthusiast’s eye for the subject and a trained historian’s sense for

where we might have erred helped us immeasurably. We are grateful
for the many hours he spent and the many mistakes he caught.
Marcus Weldon and the entire Nokia Bell Labs team—including and
especially Peter Winzer and Ed Eckert—opened their doors and
archives to us. We are grateful for the time they spent and the
resources they shared. Understanding Bell Labs is crucial to making
sense of Shannon’s life, and we could not have done this work
without them.
Will Goodman, Internet sleuth extraordinaire, aided us in tracking
down the contact information of various Shannon family members
and contemporaries. We like to think Shannon himself might have
been impressed by Will’s roving curiosity—he’s a twenty-first-century
tinkerer-detective if ever there was one.
To the Shannon family, we thank you for taking the time to share
family lore with two perfect strangers. Betty Shannon agreed to speak
with us, a conversation that gave us a rich look at the relationship
between her and her late husband. Claude’s son and daughter, Andrew
and Peggy Shannon, also spoke to us at length. Both Shannons were
generous enough to read a familiar story about a man they knew well
and correct errors (and even typos!) along the way. We could not have
completed this project without their help, and we are in their debt.
Like the Shannons, many people answered cold emails and phone
calls and took the time to sit down with us and talk. Robert Gallager
allowed us an interview—and then painstakingly read each page of the
draft and corrected numerous missteps. He was incredibly generous

with his time and with his patience for two nontechnical writers.
Arthur Lewbel also read a draft, offered wise suggestions, and gave us
a window into Shannon’s life as a juggler that we could not have
gotten otherwise. Tom Kailath helped us make sense of Shannon and
Wiener’s contributions to information theory and read an early
version of the text. Dave Forney wrote a long memo about this text
that proved enormously helpful and helped us lock down the
mathematics as best as two nonmath minds could. We appreciate
their time and contribution.
Kevin Currie helped us find, assemble, and select the photography
in the middle of this book. With no prior experience doing such a
thing, he jumped right in, and he did a marvelous job. Without his
help, we could not have gathered the necessary photos to tell this
story well—and we are grateful to him for his help.
Our deepest thanks also to Brockway McMillan, Irwin Jacobs,
Ronald and Fan Chung Graham, John Horgan, Larry Roberts, Anthony
Ephremides, Maria Moulton-Barrett, Len Kleinrock, Henry Pollak,
Norma Barzman, Ed Thorp, Martin Greenberger, the late Bob Fano, and
the late Solomon Golomb. At one point or another, they indulged us
with their time and help, and this project is richer for their
involvement.
And to our own families, this should bring to a close the sharing of
endless Shannon trivia. No, seriously, we’ve reached our limit, and
we’ll stop. Though for babies Venice and Abigail, born within a week

of one another during the course of this project’s final year, there may
be a bit more information to come.

About the Authors

© DAMON DAHLEN

JIMMY SONI has served as an editor at the New York Observer
and the Washington Examiner, and as managing editor of the
Huffington Post. He is a former speechwriter, and his written work and
commentary have appeared in Slate, The Atlantic, and CNN, among
other outlets. He is a graduate of Duke University.

© RASHIDAH DE VORE

ROB GOODMAN is a doctoral candidate at Columbia University
and a former congressional speechwriter. He has written for Slate, The
Atlantic, Politico, and The Chronicle of Higher Education. His scholarly
work has appeared in History of Political Thought, the Kennedy
Institute of Ethics Journal, and The Journal of Medicine and Philosophy.
Soni and Goodman are the coauthors of Rome’s Last Citizen: The Life
and Legacy of Cato, Mortal Enemy of Caesar.
MEET THE AUTHORS, WATCH VIDEOS AND MORE AT

SimonandSchuster.com
Authors.SimonandSchuster.com/Jimmy-Soni
Authors.SimonandSchuster.com/Rob-Goodman

ALSO BY JIMMY SONI AND ROB GOODMAN
Rome’s Last Citizen: The Life and Legacy of Cato, Mortal Enemy of
Caesar

Illustration Credits

Otsego County Times: 1
Necrology files, Bentley Historical Library, University of Michigan: 2
US Patent and Trademark Office, Patent No 407,130: 3
College of Engineering Records, Bentley Historical Library, University
of Michigan: 4
Detroit Publishing Company Photograph Collection: 5
Shannon family: 6, 9, 18, 23, 24, 25, 27, 29, 33, 34, 36, 42, 43, 44, 45
Roger W/Flickr: 7
The World’s Work (1902): 8
Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge. Reproduced by
permission: 10
Courtesy MIT Museum: 11, 22, 31, 32, 35, 37, 38, 40
Courtesy

of

Harry

H.

Laughlin

Papers,

Special

Collections

Department, Pickler Memorial Library, Truman State University: 12
Photographer unknown. From the Shelby White and Leon Levy
Archives Center, Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, NJ, USA:

13
Public Domain: 14, 19
Nokia Bell Labs: 15, 16, 21, 26
NASA: 17
Courtesy of the Hartley Family/Wikimedia Commons: 20
Library of Congress: 28
Alfred Eisenstaedt/The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images: 30
Courtesy of Edward Thorp: 39
Steve Hansen/The LIFE Images Collection/Getty Images: 41

We hope you enjoyed reading this Simon & Schuster
ebook.
Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on new releases, deals,
recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to sign up and see terms
and conditions.

CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP
Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and send you
more of what you like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers in your inbox.

Notes

Epigraph
“Geniuses are the luckiest”: W. H. Auden, “Foreword,” in Dag Hammarskjöld, Markings (New
York: Knopf, 1964), xv.

Introduction
“This is—ridiculous”: Anthony Ephremides, “Claude E. Shannon 1916–2001,” IEEE Information
Theory Society Newsletter, March 2001.
“as if Newton had showed up”: John Horgan, “Claude E. Shannon: Unicyclist, Juggler, and
Father of Information Theory,” Scientific American, January 1990, 22B.
“the Magna Carta”: Ibid., 22A.
“a bomb”: John Pierce, “The Early Days of Information Theory,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory 19, no. 1 (1973): 4.
“a fearsome thing”: Philip McCord Morse, In at the Beginnings: A Physicist’s Life (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1977), 121.
“became the basic concept”: Walter Isaacson, The Innovators: How a Group of Inventors,
Hackers, Geniuses, and Geeks Created the Digital Revolution (New York: Simon & Schuster,
2014), 49.
“possibly the most”: Howard Gardner, quoted in “MIT Professor Claude Shannon Dies; Was
Founder

of

Digital

Communications,”

MIT

News,

February

27,

2001,

newsoffice.mit.edu/2001/shannon.
“the operations of genius”: Harold Arnold, quoted in Jon Gertner, The Idea Factory: Bell Labs
and the Great Age of American Innovation (New York: Penguin, 2012), 121.
“People did very well”: Henry Pollak, interviewed by the authors August 7, 2014.
“an analysis of some of the fundamental properties”: Letter from Claude Shannon to Vannevar

Bush, February 16, 1939, Claude Elwood Shannon Papers, Library of Congress.
“How he got that insight”: Robert Fano, quoted in W. Mitchell Waldrop, “Claude Shannon:
Reluctant

Father

of

the

Digital

Age,”

MIT Technology Review,

July

1,

2001,

www.technologyreview.com/s/401112/claude-shannon-reluctant-father-of-the-digital-age.
“a mote of dust”: Carl Sagan, Pale Blue Dot: A Vision of the Human Future in Space (New York:
Random House, 1994), 6.
“bandwagon”: Claude Shannon, “The Bandwagon,” IRE Transactions—Information Theory 2,
no. 1 (1956): 3.
“XFOML RXKHRJFFJUJ”: Claude Shannon, “A Mathematical Theory of Communication,” in
Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, ed. N. J. A. Sloane and Aaron D. Wyner (New
York: IEEE Press, 1992), 14. The paper was originally printed in Bell System Technical
Journal 27 (July, October 1948): 379–423, 623–56.

Chapter 1: Gaylord
“53‡‡†”: Edgar Allan Poe, “The Gold-Bug,” in The Gold-Bug and Other Tales, ed. Stanley
Appelbaum (Mineola, NY: Dover, 1991), 100.
leather straps: Delbert Trew, “Barbed Wire Telegraph Lines Brought Gossip and News to Farm
and Ranch,” Farm Collector, September 2003. See also David B. Sicilia, “How the West Was
Wired,” Inc., June 1997.
“Shannon-Wolf Nuptials” . . . “If anything is wanted”: Otsego County Times, August 27, 1909.
“wedding gown of white satin”: Otsego County Times, August 27, 1936. The reference is to the
wedding of Mabel’s daughter, at which she wore her mother’s dress.
“Mr. Shannon, the groom”: Otsego County Times, August 27, 1909.
“Something which should be found”: C. E. Shannon, advertisement, Otsego County Herald and
Times, November 1, 1912.
“He would sometimes help me”: Shannon, interviewed by Donald J. Albers, 1990.
“glowing recommendations”: Ibid.
“At a meeting”: Reprinted in “A Brief History of Gaylord Community Schools—1920 to 1944,”
Otsego County Herald Times, May 2, 1957, goo.gl/oVb0pT.
Library Board: “Mrs. Mabel Shannon Dies in Chicago,” Otsego County Herald Times, December
27, 1945.

“The fact that”: Perry Francis Powers and H. G. Cutler, A History of Northern Michigan and Its
People (Chicago: Lewis, 1912), iv.
ten pins: H. C. McKinley, “Step Back in Time: A New County Seat and the First Newspaper,”
Gaylord

Herald

Times,

reprinted

January

6,

2016,

www.petoskeynews.com/gaylord/featured-ght/top-gallery/step-back-in-time-a-newcounty-seat-and-the/article_88155b9f-0965-56c2-b2ce-85456427fc70.html.
“WISCONSIN GIRL,” “A woman smoking” . . . “LUMBERJACK DIES” . . . “VERN MATTS LOSES
FINGER,” “MEETING CALLED TO DISCUSS ARTICHOKES” . . . “splotches of silver”: Otsego
County Herald and Times, April 28, 1916; September 20, 1923; September 27, 1923; Otsego
County Herald Times, November 18, 1926; September 27, 1928; September 13, 1928; Otsego
County Herald and Times, September 27, 1923.
“the first business”: Otsego County Herald Times, October 22, 1969.
“Norbert always felt”: Paul A. Samuelson, “Some Memories of Norbert Wiener,” in The Legacy
of Norbert Wiener: A Centennial Symposium in Honor of the 100th Anniversary of Norbert
Wiener’s Birth, October 8–14, 1994, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, ed. David Jerison, I. M. Singer, and Daniel W. Stroock (Providence, RI:
American Mathematical Society, 1997), 38.
“one of Gaylord’s most popular girls”: Otsego County Times, August 27, 1936.
“She was a model student”: Shannon, interviewed by Albers, 1990.
“A Poor Boy”: Reprinted in “A Brief History of Gaylord Community Schools—1920 to 1944,”
Otsego County Herald Times, May 2, 1957, goo.gl/oVb0pT.
“Some names” . . . “boys in those grades”: Letter from Shannon to Virginia Howe, May 2, 1983,
Shannon Papers.
“I think one”: Claude Shannon, interviewed by Friedrich-Wilhelm Hagemeyer, February 28,
1977.
“always seems a little dull”: Letter from Shannon to Irene Angus, August 8, 1952, Shannon
Papers.
“first place”: Otsego County Herald Times, April 17, 1930.
“dirt, settlings, and foul matter”: U.S. Patent No. 407,130.
“As a young boy”: Shannon, interviewed by Hagemeyer, February 28, 1977.
“He and my brother”: Quoted in Julie Kettlewell, “Gaylord Honors ‘Father to the Information
Theory,’ ” Otsego Herald Times, September 3, 1998.

“Claude was the brains”: Quoted in Melinda Cerny, “Engineering Industry Honors Shannon,
His Hometown,” Otsego Herald Times, September 3, 1998.
John Ogden: Jack Harpster, John Ogden, The Pilgrim (1609–1682): A Man of More than Ordinary
Mark (Cranbury, NJ: Associated University Presses, 2006), 209.

Chapter 2: Ann Arbor
“8. Have you earned”: Claude Shannon Alumnus File, Bentley Historical Library, University of
Michigan.
“the century to come”: Quoted in James Fraser Cocks and Cathy Abernathy, Pictorial History
of Ann Arbor, 1824–1974 (Ann Arbor: Michigan Historical Collections/Bentley Historical
Library Ann Arbor Sesquicentennial Committee, 1974), 54.
“I am not at all”: Ibid., 92.
“enrollments”: Anne Duderstadt, “Engineering,” in The University of Michigan: A Photographic
Saga,
umhistory.dc.umich.edu/history/publications/photo_saga/media/PDFs/12%20Engineering.pdf.
“with his characteristic chuckle”: Hillard A. Sutin, “A Tribute to Mortimer E. Cooley,” Michigan
Technic, March 1935, 103.
“Gentlemen, if you could”: Ibid., 105.
“surprised their visitors”: Michigan Alumnus 22 (1916): 463.
“I wasn’t really quite sure”: Shannon, interviewed by Hagemeyer, February 28, 1977.
“A feature of all meetings”: F. W. Owens and Helen B. Owens, “Mathematics Clubs—Junior
Mathematics Club, University of Michigan,” American Mathematical Monthly 43, no. 10
(December 1936): 636.
“Claude Shannon has been made”: “Gaylord Locals,” Otsego County Herald Times, November
15, 1934.
“Breakfast at the dining hall”: 1934 Michiganensian, ed. C. Wallace Graham et al. (Ann Arbor,
1934), 364.
“removes his legs”: Ibid., 370–72.
“He laughed in small explosions”: Maria Moulton-Barrett, Graphotherapy (New York: Trafford,
2005), 84.
first publication credit: Shannon, “Problems and Solutions—E58,” American Mathematical
Monthly 41, no. 3 (March 1934): 191–92.

“problems believed to be new”: Otto Dunkel, H. L. Olson, and W. F. Cheney, Jr., “Problems and
Solutions,” American Mathematical Monthly 41, no. 3 (March 1934): 188–89.
“In the following division”: R. M. Sutton, “Problems for Solution,” American Mathematical
Monthly 40, no. 8 (October 1933): 491.
“In two concentric circles”: G. R. Livingston, “Problems for Solution,” American Mathematical
Monthly 41, no. 6 (June 1934): 390.
after his undergraduate days were over: With his MIT admission in hand, Shannon would
spend the summer of 1936 in Ann Arbor, “taking extracurricular work”; Otsego County
Herald Times, August 6, 1936.
“I pushed hard for that job”: Shannon, interviewed by Albers, 1990.

Chapter 3: The Room-Sized Brain
“it ran over”: Quoted in G. Pascal Zachary, Endless Frontier: Vannevar Bush, Engineer of the
American Century (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999), 26.
“the man who” . . . “the general of physics”: J. D. Ratcliff, “Brains,” Collier’s, January 17, 1942;
“Vannevar Bush: General of Physics,” Time, April 3, 1944.
“an apple drops from a tree”: Vannevar Bush, Pieces of the Action (New York: Morrow, 1970),
181.
“the towing of one car”: Harold Hazen, quoted in David A. Mindell, Between Human and
Machine: Feedback, Control, and Computing before Cybernetics (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 2002), 151.
“You and I”: Silvanus P. Thomson, The Life of William Thomson, Baron Kelvin of Largs
(London: Macmillan, 1910), 1:98.
“Go, wondrous creature”: Alexander Pope, “An Essay on Man,” 2.19–20; epigraph to William
Thomson, “Essay on the Figure of the Earth,” Kelvin Collection, University of Glasgow.
“calculation of so methodical a kind”: Thomson, “The Tides: Evening Lecture to the British
Association at the Southampton Meeting, August 25, 1882,” in Scientific Papers, ed. Charles
W. Eliot (New York: Collier & Son, 1910), 30:307.
“I would construct a machine”: Quoted in A. Ben Clymer, “The Mechanical Analog Computers
of Hannibal Ford and William Newell,” IEEE Annals of the History of Computing 15, no. 2
(1993): 23.

Hannibal Ford was not the first: For instance, an earlier integrator was developed by Arthur
Pollen for the British navy but was not widely adopted. See Norman Friedman, Naval
Firepower: Battleship Guns and Gunnery in the Dreadnought Era (Barnsley, England:
Seaforth, 2008), 53ff.
“a marvel of precision”: Quoted in Karl L. Wildes and Nilo A. Lindgren, A Century of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science at MIT, 1882–1982 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1986), 87.
“By turning the nut”: Daniel C. Stillson, U.S. Patent 126,161, “Improvement in Pipe Wrenches,”
U.S. Patent Office, 1872 (an example of a patent that Bush may have used for this exercise).
“A man learns”: John Perry, The Calculus for Engineers (London: Edward Arnold, 1897), 5, cited
in Larry Owens, “Vannevar Bush and the Differential Analyzer: The Text and Context of an
Early Computer,” Technology and Culture 27, no. 1 (1986): 63–95.
“well-stocked with clay”: Benchara Branford, A Study of Mathematical Education (Oxford:
Clarendon, 1908), viii, cited in Owens, “Vannevar Bush and the Differential Analyzer.”
“uncertain always”: Paul Fussell, Class: A Guide Through the American Status System (New
York: Touchstone, 1992), 64.
“It was a fearsome thing”: Morse, In at the Beginnings, 121.
“in calculating the scattering”: D. R. Hartree, “The Bush Differential Analyzer and its
Applications,” Nature 146 (September 7, 1940): 320.
“still interpreted mathematics”: Owens, “Vannevar Bush and the Differential Analyzer,” 95.
“It is an analogue machine”: Quoted in Zachary, Endless Frontier, 49.

Chapter 4: MIT
“Institute folklore”: Fred Hapgood, Up the Infinite Corridor: MIT and the Technical Imagination
(New York: Basic Books, 1994), 61.
“efficiency and avoidance of lost motion”: John Ripley Freeman, “Study No. 7 for New
Buildings for the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,” MIT Libraries, Institute Archives
and Special Collections, libraries.mit.edu/archives/exhibits/freeman.
“an electrical switch”: James Gleick, The Information: A History, a Theory, a Flood (New York:
Pantheon, 2011), 173.
“As a material machine”: W. E. Johnson, “The Logical Calculus,” Mind: A Quarterly Review of
Psychology and Philosophy 1 (1892): 3.

blue-eyed and left-handed: For this example, and for our discussion of Boolean logic in
general, we are indebted to Paul J. Nahin, The Logician and the Engineer: How George Boole
and Claude Shannon Created the Information Age (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2013), esp. 45–47.
“(x + y)’ = x’y’”: This particular law was one of those identified by Augustus De Morgan,
another important contributor to formal logic.
“It’s not so much”: “Profile of Claude Shannon—Interview by Anthony Liversidge,” in Claude
Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, xxvi.
“I think I had more fun”: Ibid.
“any circuit”: Shannon, “A Symbolic Analysis of Relay and Switching Circuits,” Transactions
of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers 57 (1938): 471.
Consider a problem: This example is derived from INTOSAI Standing Committee on IT Audit,
“1 + 1 = 1: A Tale of Genius,” IntoIT 18 (2003): 56.
“possibly the most important” . . . “One of the greatest” . . . “The most important” . . .
“Monumental”: Gardner, quoted in “MIT Professor Claude Shannon Dies”; Solomon W.
Golomb, “Retrospective: Claude E. Shannon (1916–2001),” Science, April 20, 2001, 455;
William Poundstone, Fortune’s Formula: The Untold Story of the Scientific Betting System
That Beat the Casinos and Wall Street (New York: Hill & Wang, 2005), 20; Marvin Minsky,
quoted in Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, xix.
“became the basic concept”: Isaacson, The Innovators, 49.
“an annus mirabilis”: Ibid., 38.
“an all-or-none device”: John von Neumann, “First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC,” in The
Origins of Digital Computers: Selected Papers, ed. Brian Randell (New York: Springer-Verlag,
1973), 362.
“Years ago”: Hapgood, Up the Infinite Corridor, 11.

Chapter 5: A Decidedly Unconventional Type of Youngster
“Skin Effect Resistance,” etc.: Victor J. Decorte, “Skin Effect Resistance Ratio of a Circular
Loop

of

Wire”

(MS

thesis,

Massachusetts

Institute

of

Technology,

1929),

hdl.handle.net/1721.1/81515; Burdett P. Cottrell, “An Investigation of Two Methods of
Measuring the Acceleration of Rotating Machinery” (MS thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 1929), hdl.handle.net/1721.1/85720; R. A. Swan and W. F. Bartlett, “Three

Mechanisms of Breakdown of Pyrex Glass” (BS thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 1929), hdl.handle.net/1721.1/49611; James Sophocles Dadakis, “A Plan for
Remodeling an Industrial Power Plant” (BS thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
1930), hdl.handle.net/1721.1/51558; Herbert E. Korb et al., “A Proposal to Electrify a
Section of the Boston and Maine Railroad Haverhill Division” (MS thesis, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 1933), hdl.handle.net/1721.1/10560.
“What’s your secret”: “Profile of Claude Shannon—Interview by Anthony Liversidge,” in
Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, xxxii.
“I don’t happen to be”: Ibid., xxviii.
“I am convinced”: Letter from R. H. Smith to Karl Compton, April 11, 1939, Office of the
President Records, MIT Archive, cited in Erico Marui Guizzo, “The Essential Message:
Claude Shannon and the Making of Information Theory” (MS diss., Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, 2003), 13.
“Somehow I doubt”: Letter from Compton to Smith, April 13, 1939, Office of the President
Records, MIT Archive, cited in Guizzo, “The Essential Message,” 13.
A 1939 photo: Norma Barzman, The Red and the Blacklist: The Intimate Memoir of a Hollywood
Expatriate (New York: Nation Books, 2003), 213.
“a decidedly unconventional type”: Letter from Bush to E. B. Wilson, December 15, 1938,
Vannevar Bush Papers, Library of Congress.
“Bush believed Shannon”: Poundstone, Fortune’s Formula, 21.
brief notice: “Youthful Instructor Wins Noble Award,” New York Times, January 24, 1940.
Back in Michigan: “Institute Reports on Claude Shannon,” Otsego County Herald Times,
February 8, 1940.
“I have a sneaking suspicion”: Letter from Shannon to Bush, December 13, 1939, Shannon
Papers.
“queer algebra”: Letter from Vannevar Bush to Barbara Burks, January 5, 1938, Bush Papers.
“In these days”: Quoted in Zachary, Endless Frontier, 70.

Chapter 6: Cold Spring Harbor
“fittest families”: Quoted in Garland E. Allen, “The Eugenics Record Office at Cold Spring
Harbor: An Essay in Institutional History,” Osiris 2, no. 2 (1986): 258.

mailed state legislators: Philip K. Wilson, “Harry Laughlin’s Eugenic Crusade to Control the
‘Socially Inadequate’ in Progressive Era America,” Patterns of Prejudice 36, no. 1 (2002): 49.
a Nazi poster: Brenda Jo Brueggeman, Deaf Subjects: Between Identities and Places (New York:
New York University Press, 2009), 145.
“biochemical deficiencies,” etc.: Allen, “The Eugenics Record Office,” 239.
“Sometimes a father”: C. B. Davenport, Naval Officers: Their Heredity and Development
(Washington, DC: Carnegie Institution of Washington, 1919), 29, quoted in Allen, “The
Eugenics Record Office.”
“Thousands of stars”: Frances Williston Burks, Barbara’s Philippine Journey (Yonkers-onHudson, NY: World Book, 1921), 25.
“surely Shannon is gifted”: Letter from Burks to Bush, January 10, 1938, Bush Papers.
“To advise a youth like Shannon”: Quoted in Robert Price, “Oral History: Claude E. Shannon,”
IEEE Global History Network, July 28, 1982, www.ieeeghn.org/wiki/index.php/OralHistory:Claude_E._Shannon.
“No work has been done”: Shannon, “An Algebra for Theoretical Genetics,” in Claude Elwood
Shannon: Collected Papers, 920.
“Although I looked”: Letter from Shannon to Bush, February 16, 1939, Bush Papers.
“Much of the power”: Shannon, “An Algebra for Theoretical Genetics,” in Claude Elwood
Shannon: Collected Papers, 895.
“genes are carried”: Ibid., 892–93.
“My theory has to do with”: “Profile of Claude Shannon—Interview by Anthony Liversidge,” in
Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, xxvii.
“he did not even know”: Letter from Vannevar Bush to E. B. Wilson, December 15, 1938, Bush
Papers.
“very suitable” . . . “very much impressed” . . . “This, I feel strongly”: Letter from Lowell J. Reed
to Halbert L. Dunn, April 9, 1940, Bush Papers; letter from Dunn to Bush, April 19, 1940,
Bush Papers; letter from Bush to Shannon, January 27, 1939, Bush Papers.
“I had a good time”: Shannon, interviewed by Hagemeyer, February 28, 1977.
“few scientists”: Letter from Burks to Bush, January 20, 1939, Bush Papers.
“I doubt very much”: Letter from Bush to Shannon, January 27, 1939, Bush Papers.
“did not need to corrupt”: Robert Gallager, personal communication, July 1, 2016.
“After I had found the answers” . . . “Too lazy”: “Profile of Claude Shannon—Interview by
Anthony Liversidge,” xxviii, xxvii.

ranked Shannon: James F. Crow, “Shannon’s Brief Foray into Genetics,” Genetics 159, no. 3
(2001): 915–17.
“that the work of all three”: Crow, “Notes to ‘An Algebra for Theoretical Genetics,’ ” in Claude
Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, 921.
“Dear Dr. Bush”: Letter from Shannon to Bush, February 16, 1939, Shannon Papers.

Chapter 7: The Labs
“Real life mathematics”: Bernard Beauzamy, “Real Life Mathematics,” lecture, Dublin
Mathematical Society, February 2001, scmsa.eu/archives/BB_real_life_maths_2001.htm.
“unpredictable, irrational”: Moulton-Barrett, Graphotherapy, 90.
“Why don’t you come out here”: Norma Barzman, interviewed by the authors, December 21,
2014.
“Christ-like”: Quoted in Gertner, The Idea Factory, 121.
“We spoke to each other”: Barzman, The Red and the Blacklist, 378.
“How can you” . . . “big trouble” . . . “was so loving”: Norma Barzman, interviewed by the
authors, December 21, 2014.
denied them a room: Poundstone, Fortune’s Formula, 22.
“I did not”: Letter from Shannon to Bush, February 16, 1940, Bush Papers.
“Well, I applied”: Shannon, interviewed by Hagemeyer, February 28, 1977.
“light-sensing reader system”: Bradley O’Neill, “Dead Medium: The Comparator; the Rapid
Selector,” www.deadmedia.org/notes/1/017.html.
“The only point I have in mind”: Bush to Shannon, June 7, 1940. Vannevar Bush Papers,
Library of Congress.
“a very careful and formal person . . . rather frowned on”: “Obituary: Thornton Carl Fry,”
American Astronomical Society, January 1, 1991.
“Had I ever read”: Thornton C. Fry, interviewed by Deirdre M. La Porte, Henry O. Pollak, and
G. Baley Price, January 3–4, 1981, 4.
“was where the future . . . the country’s intellectual utopia . . . the crown jewel”: Gertner, The
Idea Factory, 1.
“to consider what occurred”: Ibid., 5.
“the method of”: “Improvement in Telegraphy,” Patent Number US 174465 A

“carry on scientific research”: Walter Gifford, “The Prime Incentive,” Bell Laboratories Records,
vols. 1 and 2 (September 1925–September 1926), 18.
“fundamental questions of physics”: Gertner, The Idea Factory, 27.
“When I first came”: Henry Pollak, interviewed by the authors, August 7, 2014.
“a fairyland company”: Thornton C. Fry, interviewed by La Porte, Pollak, and Price, January 3–
4, 1981, 10.
“wraith-like and slow-moving . . . an almost spectral presence” . . . “he was allowed”: Gertner,
The Idea Factory, 28, 30.
“I had the freedom to do anything I wanted”: Shannon, interviewed by Albers, 1990.
“Though the United States holds” . . . “The typical mathematician”: Fry, “Industrial
Mathematics,” Bell Systems Technical Journal 20, no. 3 (July 1941): 256, 258.
“pathetically ignorant of mathematics”: Quoted in Gertner, The Idea Factory, 122.
“Mathematicians are queer people”: Thornton C. Fry, interviewed by La Porte, Pollak, and
Price, January 3–4, 1981, 55.
“our principle”: Henry Pollak, interviewed by the authors, August 7, 2014.
“there was nothing”: Thornton C. Fry, interviewed by La Porte, Pollak, and Price, January 3–4,
1981, 56.
“I was in the mathematics research group”: Shannon, interviewed by Hagemeyer, February 28,
1977.
exclusively by last names: Thornton C. Fry, interviewed by La Porte, Pollak, and Price, January
3–4, 1981, 11.
“There are a number of relays”: Shannon, “A Theorem on Color Coding,” Bell Laboratories,
Memorandum 40-130-153, July 8, 1940.
“The Use of the Lakatos-Hickman Relay”: Shannon, “The Use of the Lakatos-Hickman Relay in
a Subscriber Sender,” Bell Laboratories, Memorandum 40-130-179, August 3, 1940.
“I got quite a kick”: Claude Shannon to Vannevar Bush. June 5, 1940. Vannevar Bush Papers,
Library of Congress.

Chapter 8: Princeton
“a man of extraordinary brilliancy”: Norbert Wiener to J. R. Kline, April 10, 1941. Norbert
Wiener Papers, MITA.

“Mr. Shannon is one of the ablest graduates”: H. B. Phillips cable to M. Morse, October 21,
1940.
“He sees before him”: Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and
Spread of Nationalism, rev. ed. (New York: Verso, 2006), 57.
“the smartest person”: Letter from Shannon to William Aspray, October 27, 1987, Shannon
Papers.
“It is as if a wall”: Hermann Weyl, Space—Time—Matter, 4th ed., trans. Henry L. Brose (New
York: Dover, 1950), ix.
“the fluctuations”: Guizzo, “The Essential Message,” 32.
“I poured tea”: Gertner, The Idea Factory, 121.
“Your husband”: Norma Barzman, interviewed by the authors, December 21, 2014.
“The

story

is”:

Arthur

Lewbel,

“A

Personal

Tribute

to

Claude

Shannon,”

www2.bc.edu/~lewbel/Shannon.html.
“and he usually would walk along”: Shannon, interviewed by Hagemeyer, February 28, 1977.
“A kind of guilt or depression”: Richard P. Feynman, Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman, reprint
ed. (New York: Norton, 1997), 165.
“Turn off the moon”: Sam Coslow, “Turn Off the Moon,” performed by Teddy Grace on Turn
on that Red Hot Heat, rerelease, Hep Records, 1997.
“You know where”: Norma Barzman, interviewed by the authors, December 21, 2014.
“America stands at the crossroads”: Franklin Roosevelt, Proclamation 2425—Selective Service
Registration, September 16, 1940.
“Things were moving fast”: Price, “Oral History: Claude E. Shannon.”
“if you can make yourself more useful”: Shannon, interviewed by Hagemeyer, February 28,
1977.
“I think he did the work”: Maria Moulton-Barrett, interviewed by the authors, January 21,
2016.
“There were those who protested”: Bush, Pieces of the Action, 31–32.

Chapter 9: Fire Control
“requirements of military training”: Neva Reynolds. “Letter to Claude Shannon.” February 10,
1941.

“chopping wood”: Mina Rees, “Warren Weaver,” in National Academy of Sciences, Biographical
Memoirs, vol. 57 (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1987), 494.
“I didn’t know”: Warren Weaver, “Careers in Science,” in Listen to Leaders in Science, ed.
Albert Love and James Saxon Childers (Atlanta: Tupper & Love/David McKay, 1965), 276.
“I think that God”: Warren Weaver, Science and Imagination: Selected Papers (New York: Basic
Books, 1967), 111.
“I had a good capacity”: Quoted in Rees, “Warren Weaver,” 501.
“Do not overestimate science”: Warren Weaver, “Four Pieces of Advice to Young People,” in
The Project Physics Course Reader: Concepts of Motion, ed. Gerald Holton et al. (New York:
Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1970), 22.
epicure enough: Thornton C. Fry, interviewed by La Porte, Pollak, and Price, January 3–4,
1981, 95.
“At first thought”: David A. Mindell, “Automation’s Finest Hour: Bell Labs and Automatic
Control in WWII,” IEEE Control Systems 15 (1995): 72.
“I found myself”: Quoted in Howard Rheingold, Tools for Thought (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2000), 103–4.
“if my potentiometer”: Quoted in Glenn Zorpette, “Parkinson’s Gun Director,” IEEE Spectrum
26, no. 4 (1989): 43.
“I think England”: Shannon, interviewed by Hagemeyer, February 28, 1977.
“The wartime efforts”: Mindell, “Automation’s Finest Hour,” 78.
“special case of the transmission”: R. B. Blackman, H. W. Bode, and C. E. Shannon, “Data
Smoothing and Prediction in Fire-Control Systems,” Summary Technical Report of Division
7, NDRC Vol. 1: Gunfire Control, ed. Harold Hazen (Washington, DC: Office of Scientific
Research and Development, National Defense Research Committee, 1946).
“He did some stunning work”: Warren Weaver to Vannevar Bush, October 24, 1949. Bush
Papers.
“For a time”: Letter from Warren Weaver to Vannevar Bush, October 24, 1949, Bush Papers.

Chapter 10: A Six-Day Workweek
“This has not been”: Vannevar Bush, “As We May Think,” Atlantic, July 1945.
“a warren of testing labs” . . . “a six-day workweek”: Gertner, The Idea Factory, 26, 63.
“It was a war”: Fred Kaplan, “Scientists at War,” American Heritage 34, no. 4 (June 1983): 49.

“The attitude of many”: J. Barkley Rosser, “Mathematics and Mathematicians in World War II,”
in A Century of Mathematics in America, Part 1, ed. Peter Duren (Providence, RI: American
Mathematical Society, 1988), 303.
“He couldn’t care less” . . . “He said he hated it”: Maria Moulton-Barrett, interviewed by the
authors, January 21, 2016.
“those were busy times”: Shannon, interviewed by Hagemeyer, February 28, 1977.
“insisted to his dying day”: Rosser, “Mathematics and Mathematicians,” 304.

Chapter 11: The Unspeakable System
“Such an image”: Colin B. Burke, It Wasn’t All Magic: The Early Struggle to Automate
Cryptanalysis, 1930s–1960s. United States Cryptologic History, Special Series, Vol. 6,
Center For Cryptologic History, National Security Agency, 2002.
“Early in 1944”: Warren F. Kimball, ed., Churchill and Roosevelt: The Complete Correspondence,
vol. 3 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984), 11.
“some forty racks”: Christopher H. Sterling, “Churchill and Intelligence—SIGSALY: Beginning
the Digital Revolution,” Finest Hour 149 (Winter 2010–11): 31.
“rather like Rimsky-Korsakov’s”: David Kahn, How I Discovered World War II’s Greatest Spy and
Other Stories of Intelligence and Code (Boca Raton, FL: Auerbach, 2014), 147.
“Accept distortion for security”: Dave Tompkins, How to Wreck a Nice Beach: The Vocoder from
World War II to Hip-Hop, The Machine Speaks (Chicago: Stop Smiling Books, 2011), 63.
“Members working on the job”: Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1983), 247.
“It worked”: Ibid., 312.
“At a recent world fair”: Bush, “As We May Think.”
“Phrt fdygui”: Sterling, “Churchill and Intelligence,” 34.
“not a lot of laboratories”: Shannon, interviewed by Hagemeyer, February 28, 1977.
“a very down to earth discipline”: Shannon, interviewed by Hagemeyer, February 28, 1977.

Chapter 12: Turing
“Here [Turing] met a person”: Hodges, Alan Turing, 314.
“I think Turing had” . . . “We talked not at all”: Price, “Oral History: Claude E. Shannon.”

“I reached New York” . . . “I had been intending”: Alan Turing, “Alan Turing’s Report from
Washington DC, November 1942.”
“incomplete alliance”: Andrew Hodges, “Alan Turing as UK-USA Link, 1942 Onwards,” Alan
Turing Internet Scrapbook, www.turing.org.uk/scrapbook/ukusa.html.
“I am persuaded”: Turing, “Alan Turing’s Report from Washington DC, November 1942.”
“we would talk about”: Price, “Oral History: Claude E. Shannon.”
“Well, back in ’42” . . . “a very, very impressive guy”: Shannon, interviewed by Hagemeyer,
February 28, 1977.
“While there we went over”: Price, “Oral History: Claude E. Shannon.”

Chapter 13: Manhattan
“The ancient art of mathematics”: Gareth Cook, “The Singular Mind of Terry Tao,” New York
Times, July 24, 2015.
“There was a bedroom” . . . “He would find these common denominators”: Maria MoultonBarrett, interviewed by the authors, January 21, 2016.
“Barney was an intellect”: John Minck, “Inside HP: A Narrative History of Hewlett-Packard
from 1939–1990,” www.hpmemoryproject.org/timeline/john_minck/inside_hp_03.htm.
“If the prospect of building devices”: Thomas Perkins, Valley Boy: The Education of Tom
Perkins (New York: Gotham, 2007), 72.
“the world’s first”: Lawrence Fisher, “Bernard M. Oliver Is Dead at 79; Led Hewlett-Packard
Research,” New York Times, November 28, 1995.
“We became friends”: Arthur L. Norberg, “An Interview with Bernard More Oliver,” Charles
Babbage Institute for the History of Information Processing, August 9, 1985.
“One day I was talking casually”: John Pierce, “Creative Thinking,” lecture, 1951.
cowrote a key paper: Bernard More Oliver, John Pierce, and Claude Shannon, “The Philosophy
of PCM,” Proceedings of the IRE 36, no. 11 (November 1948): 1324–31.
“It turns out”: Minck, “Inside HP.”
“I think it made him sick”: Maria Moulton-Barrett, interviewed by the authors, January 21,
2016.
113–14

“he had a certain type of impatience”: Brockway McMillan, interviewed by the

authors, January 4, 2016.
“a very odd man”: Gertner, The Idea Factory, 132.

“He never argued”: Ibid., 138.
“genius is rarely able”: George Henry Lewes, The Principles of Success in Literature (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1901), 98.
“He was terribly, terribly secretive”: Maria Moulton-Barrett, interviewed by the authors,
January 21, 2016.
“he was not someone”: Robert Fano, interviewed by the authors, October 23, 2015.
“He wouldn’t have been”: Brockway McMillan, interviewed by the authors, January 4, 2016.
“My characterization of his smartness”: Quoted in William Poundstone, How to Predict the
Unpredictable: The Art of Outsmarting Almost Anyone (London: Oneworld, 2014).
“He would have taken that”: Peggy Shannon, interviewed by the authors, December 9, 2015.
“These things sometimes”: Shannon, interviewed by Hagemeyer, February 28, 1977.
“He would go quiet”: Maria Moulton-Barrett, interviewed by the authors, January 21, 2016.

Chapter 14: The Utter Dark
“Repeat, please”: Quoted in Samuel Carter, Cyrus Field: Man of Two Worlds (New York:
Putnam, 1968), 167–68. See also Arthur C. Clarke, Voice Across the Sea: The Story of Deep
Sea Cable-Laying, 1858–1958 (London: Muller, 1958).
“Down to the dark”: Rudyard Kipling, “The Deep Sea Cables,” in Rudyard Kipling’s Verse
(Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Page, 1922), quoted in Clarke, Voice Across the Sea.
“nothing so much”: “The Atlantic Telegraph Expedition,” Times (London), July 15, 1858.
“The very thought”: Thomson, The Life of William Thomson, 1:362, quoted in Clarke, Voice
Across the Sea.
“is no longer”: E. O. Wildman Whitehouse, “Report on a Series of Experimental Observations
on Two Lengths of Submarine Electric Cable, Containing, in the Aggregate, 1,125 Miles of
Wire, Being the Substance of a Paper Read Before the British Association for the
Advancement of Science, at Glasgow, Sept. 14th, 1855,” Brighton, 1855, 3, quoted in Bruce
J. Hunt, “Scientists, Engineers, and Wildman Whitehouse: Measurement and Credibility in
Early Cable Telegraphy,” British Journal for the History of Science 29, no. 2 (1996): 158.
“a fiction”: E. O. Wildman Whitehouse, “The Law of Squares—Is It Applicable or Not to the
Transmission of Signals in Submarine Circuits?,” Athenaeum, August 30, 1856, 1092–93,
quoted in Hunt, “Scientists, Engineers, and Wildman Whitehouse.”
“fallacious”: Quoted in Thomson, The Life of William Thomson, 1:330.

“The further the electricity”: Donard De Cogan, “Dr E.O.W. Whitehouse and the 1858 TransAtlantic Cable,” History of Technology 10 (1985): 2.
“Forty-eight words”: Report of the Joint Committee to Inquire into the Construction of
Submarine Telegraph Cables (London: Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1861), 237.
“bullied”: Clarke, Voice Across the Sea.

Chapter 15: From Intelligence to Information
most complex machines: See Mindell, Between Human and Machine, 107ff.
came to understand heat: See Matthew Crawford, Shop Class as Soulcraft: An Inquiry into the
Value of Work (New York: Penguin, 2010), 22–23.
a bandwidth of 3,000 hertz: Guizzo, “The Essential Message,” 26.
between continuous signals: See ibid., 27.
how to send telegraph and telephone signals: It was already “common practice to send
telegraph and telephone signals on the same wires,” but Nyquist’s work, by minimizing
interference from telegraph signals, led to clearer telephone calls. See John Pierce, An
Introduction to Information Theory: Symbols, Signals and Noise, 2nd ed. (New York: Dover,
1980), 38.
“the world of technical communications”: James L. Massey, “Information Theory: The
Copernican System of Communications,” IEEE Communications Magazine 22, no. 12 (1984):
27, cited in Guizzo, “The Essential Message.”
“by the speed of transmission”: Harry Nyquist, “Certain Factors Affecting Telegraph Speed,”
Bell System Technical Journal, April 1924, 332. See also Nyquist, “Certain Topics in
Telegraph Transmission Theory,” Transactions of the AIEE 47 (April 1928): 617–44.
the tantalizing suggestion: On the relationship between Nyquist’s and Shannon’s work, see
William Aspray, “The Scientific Conceptualization of Information: A Survey,” IEEE Annals
of the History of Computing 7, no. 2 (1985): 121.
“an important influence”: Robert Price, “A Conversation with Claude Shannon: One Man’s
Approach to Problem Solving,” IEEE Communications Magazine 22, no. 6 (May 1984): 123.
“a ball rolling,” etc.: Ralph Hartley, “Transmission of Information,” Bell System Technical
Journal 7, no. 3 (July 1928): 536–38.
a 20-letter telegram: Guizzo, “The Essential Message,” 25.
“practical engineering value”: Hartley, “Transmission of Information,” 539.

“within the realm”: Ibid., 563.
“very bright in some ways”: Shannon, interviewed by Hagemeyer, February 28, 1977.
“appears to have taken”: Pierce, An Introduction to Information Theory, 40.
“It came as a bomb”: Pierce, “The Early Days of Information Theory,” 4.

Chapter 16: The Bomb
“The fundamental problem”: Claude Shannon, “A Mathematical Theory of Communication,”
in Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, 5.
“selected from a set”: Ibid. Emphasis in original.
diagram: Ibid., 7.
genes as information-bearers: Around the time of the publication of “A Mathematical
Theory,” Shannon attempted to estimate the amount of information, in bits, in the human
genome. Shannon, untitled document, July 12, 1949, Shannon Papers; see Gleick, The
Information, 231.
“what would be the simplest source”: Price, “Oral History: Claude E. Shannon.”
A fair coin: For simplicity’s sake, this section deals only with discrete symbols, rather than
continuous ones.
One bit is the amount of information: We discuss Shannon’s revolutionary response to the
problem of noise below. Here we are leaving noise out of consideration; but one should
bear in mind that if we were to learn about the result of a coin toss through a noisy
channel, we may still get less than one bit of information, even if the coin toss itself were
fair.
“a device with two stable positions”: Shannon, “Mathematical Theory,” 6.
diagram: Ibid., 20.
“average surprise”: In other words, if the coin is weighted so that the probability of tails is low,
then the larger surprise of seeing tails is balanced against the longer odds of seeing that
outcome.
“I don’t regard it”: Price, “A Conversation with Claude Shannon,” 123.
three basic Morse characters: This slightly simplifies Shannon’s example, which allowed for
two kinds of spaces, those following letters and those following words.
“XFOML,” etc.: Shannon, “Mathematical Theory,” 14.
“The particular sequence”: Ibid., 15.

unpublished spoof: Shannon, July 4, 1949, Shannon Papers.
“Now, in English”: Poe, “The Gold-Bug,” 101–2.
switching code alphabets: Examples from David Kahn, The Codebreakers: The Story of Secret
Writing (New York: Macmillan, 1953), 749.
“I wrote”: Price, “Oral History: Claude E. Shannon.”
“Roughly, redundancy means”: Ibid. 744.
“MST PPL”: Shannon, “Information Theory,” in Encyclopaedia Britannica, 14th ed., reprinted
in Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, 216.
“When we write English”: Shannon, “Mathematical Theory,” 25.
“certain known results”: Ibid. This comment aside, cryptography is not an explicit topic of
Shannon’s 1948 paper. But because Shannon observed that his work on cryptography and
information theory were mutually influential, we have discussed the overlap between the
two fields in this chapter, especially to illustrate the importance to both of the concept of
redundancy.
“A S-M-A-L-L”: Gleick, The Information, 230.
Shannon explained: Shannon, “Information Theory,” 216.
like transmitting power: Massey, “Information Theory,” 27.
Kahn illustrates this point: Kahn, The Codebreakers, 747.
a code like this: This example is cited in Guizzo, “The Essential Message,” 40.
combining the advantages of codes: In Shannon’s more precise terms, combining “source
coding” and “channel coding.”
“Up until that time”: Robert Gallager, interviewed by the authors, August 8, 2014.
founded a new field and solved most of its problems: David J. C. MacKay, Information Theory,
Inference, and Learning Algorithms (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 14.
information reduces “entropy”: Specifically, in Shannon’s terms, entropy can be thought of as
uncertainty, and information can be thought of as the amount of uncertainty that is
reduced by an observation, measurement, or description.
“And more importantly”: An early version of the anecdote appears in Myron Tribus and
Edward C. McIrving, “Energy and Information,” Scientific American 225 (1971): 179–88.
Hungarian physicist Leo Szilard: For a more complete story of Szilard and “Maxwell’s Demon,”
see Gleick, The Information, 275–80, and George Johnson, Fire in the Mind (New York:
Vintage, 1995), 114–21.
“Organisms organize”: Gleick, The Information, 281.

Chapter 17: Building a Bandwagon
“The Magna Carta” . . . “Without Claude’s work” . . . “A major contribution” . . . “A universal
clue” . . . “I reread it every year” . . . “I know of no greater”: Horgan, “Claude E. Shannon,” 22A;
Lewbel, “A Personal Tribute to Claude Shannon”; Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and
New Media, George Mason University, “Remembering Claude Shannon,” March–August
2001,

chnm.gmu.edu/digitalhistory/links/cached/chapter6/6_19b_surveyresponse.htm;

Robert W. Lucky, Silicon Dreams, quoted in Lee Dembart, “Book Review: Putting on
Thinking Caps Over Artificial Intelligence,” Los Angeles Times, August 15, 1989.
“While, of course”: R. J. McEliece, The Theory of Information and Coding: Student Edition (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 13.
“Weaver became the expositor”: Ronald R. Kline, The Cybernetics Moment: Or Why We Call Our
Age the Information Age (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2015), 122.
“Radar won the war”: Quoted in Wolfgang Saxon, “Albert G. Hill, 86, Who Helped Develop
Radar In World War II,” New York Times, October 29, 1996.
“press’s new series”: Letter from Louis Ridenour to Warren Weaver, March 21, 1949; letter
from Ridenour to Mervin Kelly, April 12, 1949, Institute of Communications Research,
Record Series 13/5/1, University of Illinois Archives.
bestselling: Jorge Reina Schement and Brent D. Ruben, Between Communication and
Information 4 (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 1993), 53.
“There could very easily”: Letter from Weaver to Ridenour, November 17, 1949, Shannon
Papers, quoted in Kline.

Chapter 18: Mathematical Intentions, Honorable and Otherwise
“I have read your book”: Adam Sedgwick, “Letter to Charles Darwin,” November 24, 1859.
“seemed initially too simple”: Sylvia Nasar, A Beautiful Mind: The Life of Mathematical Genius
and Nobel Laureate John Nash (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1998).
“I have always wanted”: J. L. Doob, “Review of A Mathematical Theory of Communication,”
Mathematical Review 10 (1949): 133.
“Robert was all for it”: Naresh Jain, “Record of the Celebration of the Life of Joseph Leo Doob,”
www.math.uiuc.edu/People/doob_record.html.

“Are there infinitely many”: Lashi Bandara, “Explainer: The Point of Pure Mathematics,” The
Conversation,

August

1,

2011,

theconversation.com/explainer-the-point-of-pure-

mathematics-2385.
“must learn the art of numbers”: Uta C. Merzbach and Carl B. Boyer, A History of Mathematics,
3rd ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2011), 77.
“There is a tale told”: Ibid., 91.
“manifesto for mathematics” . . . “Beauty is the first test”: G. H. Hardy, A Mathematician’s
Apology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013), back matter, 85, 135.
“The discussion is suggestive”: Doob, “Review of A Mathematical Theory of Communication.”
“LIVERSIDGE: When The Mathematical Theory”: “Profile of Claude Shannon—Interview by
Anthony Liversidge,” in Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, xxvii.
“the occasional liberties taken”: Shannon, “Mathematical Theory,” 50.
“When Shannon’s paper appeared”: Solomon W. Golomb, “Claude Elwood Shannon,” Notices of
the AMS 49, no. 1 (2001): 9.
“Distinguished and accomplished as Doob was”: Edward O. Thorp, personal communication,
April 8, 2017.
“It turned out that everything he claimed”: Sergio Verdú, “Fireside Chat on the Life of Claude
Shannon,” www.youtube.com/watch?v=YEt9P2kp9BE.

Chapter 19: Wiener
“the American John Von Neumann”: Nasar, A Beautiful Mind, 135.
“I had full liberty . . . He would begin the discussion”: Norbert Wiener, Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood
and Youth (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1964), 67–68.
“From every angle”: Paul Samuelson, “Some Memories of Norbert Wiener,” in The Legacy of
Norbert Wiener: A Centennial Symposium (Cambridge, MA: American Mathematical Society,
1994).
“In appearance and behaviour”: Hans Freudenthal, “Norbert Wiener,” in Complete Dictionary
of

Scientific

Biography,

www.encyclopedia.com/people/science-and-

technology/mathematics-biographies/norbert-wiener.
“Can you show me where”: Samuelson, “Some Memories of Norbert Wiener.”
Shannon had taken Wiener’s class: Price, “Oral History: Claude E. Shannon.”

“an idol of mine”: “Profile of Claude Shannon—Interview by Anthony Liversidge,” in Claude
Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, xxxii.
“Shannon and I”: Norbert Wiener, I Am a Mathematician, 179.
“Under these circumstances”: Norbert Wiener to Walter Pitts, April 4, 1947. Norbert Wiener
Papers, MITA.
“total irresponsibleness”: Norbert Wiener to Arturo Rosenblueth, April 16, 1947. Norbert
Wiener Papers, MITA.
“lost priority”: Norbert Wiener to Warren McCulloch, April 5, 1947. Norbert Wiener Papers,
MITA.
“One of my competitors”: Norbert Wiener to Arturo Rosenblueth, April 16, 1947. Norbert
Wiener Papers, MITA.
“The Bell people”: Norbert Wiener to Warren McCulloch, May 2, 1927, Norbert Wiener Papers,
MITA.
“the entire field”: Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in the Animal
and the Machine, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1961), 11.
“might be comparable”: John Platt, “Books That Make a Year’s Reading and a Lifetime’s
Enrichment,” New York Times, February 2, 1964.
“the biggest bite”: Gregory Bateson, Steps to an Ecology of the Mind, 484.
“Wiener in a sense”: Thomas Kailath, interviewed by the authors, June 2, 2016.
“in fact, there is no evidence”: Sergio Verdú, interviewed by the authors, September 6, 2015.
“When I talked to Norbert”: Price, “Oral History: Claude E. Shannon.”
“I don’t think Wiener”: Claude Shannon, in Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, xix

Chapter 20: A Transformative Year
“For most people”: Nasar, A Beautiful Mind, 228.
“My mother was eternally grateful”: Peggy Shannon, interviewed by the authors, December 9,
2015.
“students and faculty”: “Who We Are,” Douglass Residential College, Rutgers University,
douglass.rutgers.edu/history.
“fortunately had good grades”: Betty Shannon, interviewed by the authors, November 12,
2015.
“the best offer”: Betty Shannon, interviewed by the authors, November 12, 2015.

“he was very quiet”: Ibid.
“not very formal”: Ibid.
“I need my wife”: Quoted in Monique Frize, Peter Frize, and Nadine Faulkner, The Bold and the
Brave (Ottawa, Canada: University of Ottawa Press, 2009), 285.
“I think I’m more visual than symbolic”: Shannon, interviewed by Albers, 1990.
“He didn’t know math” . . . “He had a weird insight”: Quoted in Kevin Coughlin, “Claude
Shannon: The Genius of the Digital Age,” Star-Ledger (New Jersey), February 28, 2001.
“wouldn’t go out of his way”: Quoted in Eugene Chiu et al., “Mathematical Theory of Claude
Shannon,” December 2001, web.mit.edu/6.933/www/Fall2001/Shannon1.pdf.
“some of his early papers”: Betty Shannon, interviewed by the authors, November 12, 2015.

Chapter 21: TMI
“Great scientific theories”: Francis Bello, “The Information Theory,” Fortune, December 1953,
136–58.
“Much as I wish”: Quoted in Kline, The Cybernetics Moment, 124.
“It may be no exaggeration”: Bello, “The Information Theory,” 136.
“Gaylord native son”: “Gaylord’s Claude Shannon: ‘Einstein of Mathematical Theory,’ ” Gaylord
Herald Times, October 11, 2000.
“There were many”: Poundstone, Fortune’s Formula, 15.
“What kind of man”: Bello, “The Young Scientists,” Fortune, June 1954, 142.
“OMNI: Did you feel”: “Profile of Claude Shannon—Interview by Anthony Liversidge,” in
Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, xxviii.
“The expansion of the applications”: L. A. de Rosa, “In Which Fields Do We Graze?,” IRE
Transactions on Information Theory 1, no. 3 (1955): 2.
“Information theory has,” etc.: Shannon, “The Bandwagon,” 3.
“Claude Shannon was”: Robert G. Gallager, “Claude E. Shannon: A Retrospective on His Life,
Work, and Impact,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 47, no. 7 (2001): 2694.
“He got a little irritated”: Quoted in Omar Aftab et al., “Information Theory and the Digital
Age,” 10, web.mit.edu/6.933/www/Fall2001/Shannon2.pdf.
“I didn’t like the term”: Quoted in ibid., 9.

Chapter 22: “We Urgently Need the Assistance of Dr. Claude E.
Shannon”
“Dear Dr. Kelly”: Letter from Walter B. Smith to M. J. Kelly, May 4, 1951, National Security
Agency,

www.nsa.gov/public_info/_files/friedmanDocuments/PanelCommitteeandBoardRecords/FOLDER_393/417
“I hope very much”: Letter from Kingman Douglass to J. N. Wenger, May 7, 1951, National
Security

Agency,

www.nsa.gov/public_info/_files/friedmanDocuments/PanelCommitteeandBoardRecords/FOLDER_393/417
“One of the first” . . . “message externals”: David A. Hatch and Robert Louis Benson, “The
Korean

War:

The

SIGINT

Background,”

National

Security

Agency,

www.nsa.gov/public_info/declass/korean_war/sigint_bg.shtml.
“I spoke to Shannon today”: Handwritten note on top of letter from Kingman Douglass to J. N.
Wenger,

May

7,

1951,

National

Security

Agency,

www.nsa.gov/public_info/_files/friedmanDocuments/PanelCommitteeandBoardRecords/FOLDER_393/417
“While there have been”: Letter from Kelly to Smith, National Security Agency,

www.nsa.gov/public_info/_files/friedmanDocuments/PanelCommitteeandBoardRecords/FOLDER_393/417
“to be plucked” . . . “how to keep”: Nasar, A Beautiful Mind, 107, 106.
“the fundamental purpose”: National Security Agency, “NSA Regulation Number 11-3,”
January

22,

1953,

ia601409.us.archive.org/16/items/41788579082758/41788579082758.pdf.
“Because a considerable portion”: Anne S. Brown, “Historical Study: The National Security
Agency Scientific Advisory Board, 1952–1963” (Washington, DC: NSA Historian, Office of
Central Reference, 1965), 4.
“Lacking accessible, secure areas”: Ibid.
“Price: And you were on the board”: Price, “Oral History: Claude E. Shannon.”

Chapter 23: The Man-Machines
“Could a machine think?”: Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, trans. G. E. M.
Anscombe et al., ed. P. M. S. Hacker and Joachim Schulte, 4th ed. (Malden, MA: Blackwell,
2009), 359–60.
“I’m a machine”: Quoted in Horgan, “Claude E. Shannon,” 22B.

“had earned the right”: Henry Pollak, interviewed by the authors, August 7, 2014.
“it seemed lost on Shannon”: Gertner, The Idea Factory, 141.
“If you read Science Fiction”: Letter from Shannon to Warren S. McCulloch, August 23, 1949,
Warren S. McCulloch Papers, American Philosophical Society, Series I, Shannon
correspondence.
“to this day”: Poundstone, Fortune’s Formula, 61.
“Dear Dr. Shannon” . . . “to complete and verify” . . . “Dear Sir”: Letter from Earle L. Morrow to
Shannon, December 26, 1957, Shannon Papers; letter from George C. Paro to Shannon,
November 17, 1960, Shannon Papers; letter from Daniel J. Quinlan to Shannon, April 13,
1953, Shannon Papers.
“I think the history of science”: Shannon, “Development of Communication and Computing,
and

My

Hobby,”

lecture,

Inamori

Foundation,

Kyoto,

Japan,

November

1985,

www.kyotoprize.org/wp/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/1kB_lct_EN.pdf.
“with the possible capabilities”: [AU: Please supply reference.]
“I went out and got him” . . . “Giving it to a grown man”: “Profile of Claude Shannon—Interview
by Anthony Liversidge,” in Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, xxii.
“We did all this”: Quoted in Timothy Johnson, “Claude Elwood Shannon: Information
Theorist,” Shannon Papers.
“Hello”:

Bell

Labs,

“Claude

Shannon

Demonstrates

Machine

Learning,”

www.youtube.com/watch?v=vPKkXibQXGA.
“I was told that”: Henry Pollak, interviewed by the authors, August 7, 2014.
“Mouse with a Memory”: Time, May 19, 1952, 59.
“It is all too human”: “Presentation of a Maze-Solving Machine,” in Cybernetics: Transactions
of the Eighth Conference March 15–16, 1951, ed. Heinz von Foerster, Margaret Mead, and
Hans Lukas Teuber (New York: Josiah Macy, Jr. Foundation, 1952), 179.
“The fascination of watching Shannon’s innocent rat”: “Note by the Editors,” in ibid., xvii.
“a demonstration device”: Letter from Shannon to Irene Angus, August 8, 1952, Shannon
Papers, cited in Gertner, The Idea Factory.
“The design of game playing machines”: Shannon, “Game Playing Machines,” in Claude Elwood
Shannon: Collected Papers, 786.
“My fondest dream”: Letter from Shannon to Angus, August 8, 1952, Shannon Papers.
“In the long run”: Brock Brewer, “The Man-Machines May Talk First to Dr. Shannon,” Vogue,
April 15, 1963, 139.

“The Man-Machines” . . . “Dr. Claude E. Shannon”: Ibid., 89.
“you have to think of problems”: Ibid.
“First, how can we give computers”: Ibid., 139.
“I believe that today”: Shannon, interviewed by Hagemeyer, February 28, 1977.
“thinking is sort of the last thing”: Shannon, interviewed by Albers, 1990.
“We artificial intelligence people”: Shannon, untitled document, 1984, Shannon Papers.

Chapter 24: The Game of Kings
“an oriental sorcerer”: Quoted in Tom Standage, The Turk: The Life and Times of the Famous
Eighteenth-Century Chess-Playing Machine (New York: Walker, 2002), 23.
“the Turk—even he”: Silas Weir Mitchell, “The Last of a Veteran Chess Player.” Chess Monthly,
1857.
“who is never to be seen”: Poe, “Maelzel’s Chess Player,” in The Complete Tales of Edgar Allan
Poe (New York: Vintage Books, 1975), 438.
“at least one supervisor”: Horgan, “Claude E. Shannon,” 22A.
“Most of us”: Brockway McMillan, interviewed by the authors, January 4, 2016.
“Botvinnik was worried”: “Profile of Claude Shannon—Interview by Anthony Liversidge,” in
Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, xxix.
Another incident: Peggy Shannon, interviewed by the authors, December 9, 2015.
“There have been few new ideas”: Norman Whaland, “A Computer Chess Tutorial,” Byte,
October 1978, 168.
“Although perhaps of no practical importance,” etc.: “Programming a Computer for Playing
Chess,” in Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, 637–38, 650–54.
“Claude went hog wild”: “Profile of Claude Shannon—Interview by Anthony Liversidge,” in
Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, xxxi.
“From a behavioristic point of view”: Shannon, “A Chess-Playing Machine,” in Claude Elwood
Shannon: Collected Papers, 655.
“just foolish logic”: H. J. van den Herik, “An Interview with Claude Shannon (September 25,
1980 in Linz, Austria),” ICCA Journal 12, no. 4 (1989): 225.

Chapter 25: Constructive Dissatisfaction

“A very small percentage,” etc.: Claude Shannon, “Creative Thinking,” March 20, 1952, in
Claude Shannon’s Miscellaneous Writings, ed. N. J. A. Sloane and Aaron D. Wyner (Murray
Hill, NJ: Mathematical Sciences Research Center, AT&T Bell Laboratories, 1993), 528–39.

Chapter 26: Professor Shannon
“There is an active structure”: Quoted in Gertner, The Idea Factory, 146.
“I am having a very enjoyable time”: Quoted in Poundstone, Fortune’s Formula, 27.
“From the questions”: Letter from Shannon to John Riordan, February 20, 1956, Shannon
Papers.
“In case men’s lives”: Shannon, Assorted lecture notes, n.d., Shannon Papers.
“The following analysis”: Shannon, “The Portfolio Problem,” n.d., Shannon Papers.
“It always seemed to me”: Letter from Shannon to H. W. Bode, October 3, 1956, Shannon
Papers, quoted in Gertner, The Idea Factory, 146.
“Having spent fifteen years”: Quoted in Poundstone, Fortune’s Formula, 27.
“Shannon is one of the great people”: Henry Pollak, interviewed by the authors, August 7,
2014.
said to have wondered aloud: Thomas Kailath, interviewed by the authors, June 2, 2016.
“You

are

going

to

God’s

country”:

“Remembering

Claude

Shannon,”

chnm.gmu.edu/digitalhistory/links/cached/chapter6/6_19b_surveyresponse.htm.
“a three-sided verandah”: National Register of Historic Places application, Edmund Dwight
House,

Massachusetts

Cultural

Resource

Information

System,

mhc-

macris.net/Details.aspx?MhcId=WNT.19.
“Although he continued”: Robert E. Kahn, “A Tribute to Claude E. Shannon,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, July 2001, 18.
unicycles, in every permutation: Ronald Graham, interviewed by the authors, August, 23,
2014.
“I’ve always pursued my interests”: Quoted in Horgan, “Claude E. Shannon,” 22A.
“These were things”: Robert Gallager, interviewed by the authors, August 8, 2014.
“He was really lionized”: Quoted in Chiu et al., “Mathematical Theory of Claude Shannon.”
“If I’m going to spend”: Leonard Kleinrock, interviewed by the authors, September 16, 2016.
“I can’t be an advisor”: Quoted in Guizzo, “The Essential Message,” 61.
“I was in such awe of him”: Robert Gallager, interviewed by the authors, August 8, 2014.

“I always felt honored”: Leonard Kleinrock, interviewed by the authors, September 16, 2016.
“I was just so impressed”: Quoted in Guizzo, “The Essential Message,” 59.
“His classes were like”: Leonard Kleinrock, interviewed by the authors, September 16, 2016.
“For some problems”: Quoted in ibid., 60.
“He was not the sort of person”: Robert Gallager, interviewed by the authors, August 8, 2014.
“We all revered Shannon”: Quoted in Guizzo, “The Essential Message,” 59.
“He said, ‘Why don’t you’”: Leonard Kleinrock, interviewed by the authors, September 26,
2016.
“Shannon’s favorite thing to do”: Larry Roberts, interviewed by the authors, September 16,
2016.
“I had what I thought”: Robert Gallager, interviewed by the authors, August 8, 2014.
“People would go in”: Irwin Jacobs, interviewed by the authors, January 1, 2015.
“He did a lot of work at home” . . . “Did you know”: Peggy Shannon, interviewed by the authors,
December 9, 2015.
“golden age of information theory”: Thomas Kailath, interviewed by the authors, June 2, 2016.
“The intellectual content”: Anthony Ephremides, interviewed by the authors, May 31, 2016.
“I believe that scientists”: “Profile of Claude Shannon—Interview by Anthony Liversidge,” in
Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, xxiii.
“no mathematician should ever”: Hardy, A Mathematician’s Apology, 70.
“I started telling him about it”: Henry Pollak, interviewed by the authors, August 7, 2014.
“For everybody who built”: Robert Gallager, interviewed by the authors, August 8, 2014.
“I think that this present century”: Quoted in Gertner, The Idea Factory, 317.

Chapter 27: Inside Information
“Much of the conversation”: Peggy Shannon, interviewed by the authors, December 9, 2015.
“I had a good opinion”: “Profile of Claude Shannon—Interview by Anthony Liversidge,” in
Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, xxvii.
“I run the checkbook”: Betty Shannon, interviewed by Albers, 1990.
“their work in the stock market”: Peggy Shannon, interviewed by the authors, December 9,
2015.
“Nah, the commissions would kill you”: Quoted in Poundstone, Fortune’s Formula, 208.

“I even did some work”: “Profile of Claude Shannon—Interview by Anthony Liversidge,” in
Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, xxiv–xxv.
“used common sense”: Peggy Shannon, interviewed by the authors, December 9, 2015.
“I make my money”: Price, “Claude E. Shannon: An Interview.”
“Inside information”: Poundstone, Fortune’s Formula, 21.

Chapter 28: A Gadgeteer’s Paradise
“The secretary warned me,” etc.: Edward O. Thorp, “The Invention of the First Wearable
Computer,” Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE International Symposium on Wearable Computers,
October 1998, 4–8.
“The division of labor”: Thorp, personal communication, March 24, 2017.

Chapter 29: Peculiar Motions
“Do you mind”: Lewbel, “A Personal Tribute to Claude Shannon.”
“As a physical experiment” . . . “He just showed up”: Arthur Lewbel, interviewed by the authors,
August 8, 2014.
“One nice thing”: Lewbel, “A Personal Tribute to Claude Shannon.”
“The Juggling Club”: Peggy Shannon, interviewed by the authors, December 9, 2015.
“When Galileo wanted”: Ronald Graham, interviewed by the authors, August, 23, 2014.
“it was something”: Gertner, The Idea Factory, 319–20.
“mathematics is often described”: Persi Diaconis and Ron Graham, Magical Mathematics
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2012), 137.
“next time you see some jugglers”: Burkard Polster, “The Mathematics of Juggling,” 1,
qedcat.com/articles/juggling_survey.pdf.
“He liked peculiar motions”: Arthur Lewbel, interviewed by the authors, August 8, 2014.
“is complex enough”: Peter J. Beek and Arthur Lewbel, “The Science of Juggling,” Scientific
American 273, no. 5 (November 1995): 92.
“‘Do you think juggling’s a mere trick,’” etc.: Shannon, “Scientific Aspects of Juggling,” in
Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, 850–57.
“In his twenty years’ devotion”: “Enrico Rastelli,” Vanity Fair, February 1932, 49.

“It all started”: Shannon, “Claude Shannon’s No Drop Juggling Diorama,” in Claude Elwood
Shannon: Collected Papers, 847.
“each side making a catch”: Beek and Lewbel, “The Science of Juggling,” 97.
“The greatest numbers jugglers”: Shannon, “Claude Shannon’s No Drop Juggling Diorama,” 849.

Chapter 30: Kyoto
“He was a very modest guy”: Betty Shannon, interviewed by the authors, November 12, 2015.
“I don’t think I was ever motivated”: “Profile of Claude Shannon—Interview by Anthony
Liversidge,” in Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers, xxiv.
“the calls would come”: Peggy Shannon, interviewed by the authors, December 9, 2015.
“brilliant

contributions”:

National

Medal

of

Science

citation,

www.nationalmedals.org/laureates/claude-e-shannon.
“eleven men whose lifelong purpose”: Lyndon Johnson, Remarks Upon Presenting the National
Medal of Science Awards for 1966, February 6, 1967.
“I was seven”: Peggy Shannon, interviewed by the authors, December 9, 2015.
“to get something out of Claude”: Letter from Rud: Kompfner to Pierce, June 1, 1977, quoted
in Gertner, The Idea Factory, 323.
“An American driving in England”: Shannon, “The Fourth-Dimensional Twist, or a Modest
Proposal in Aid of the American Driver in England,” 1978, Shannon Papers.
“he’d get an award”: Peggy Shannon, interviewed by the authors, December 9, 2015.
“I have never seen such stage fright”: Quoted in University of California Television, “Claude
Shannon: Father of the Information Age,” 2002, www.youtube.com/watch?v=z2Whj_nL-x8.
“He just felt that people”: Quoted in ibid.
“Since our retirement”: Letter from Shannon to Ben [last name unknown], November 15, 1980,
Shannon Papers.
“we always thought that information theory”: Thomas Kailath, interviewed by the authors,
June 2, 2016.
“he didn’t like to boast”: Arthur Lewbel, interviewed by the authors, August 8, 2014.
nominated

for

the

Nobel

in

physics:

Nomination

Database,

NobelPrize.org,

www.nobelprize.org/nomination/archive/show_people.php?id=10947.
“You know, there’s no Nobel”: Quoted in Flo Conway and Jim Siegelman, Dark Hero of the
Information Age: In Search of Norbert Wiener, the Father of Cybernetics (New York: Basic

Books, 2005), 394, n. 327.
“After a quarter of a century”: Kazuo Inamori, “Philosophy,” Inamori Foundation, April 12,
1984, www.inamori-f.or.jp/en/kyoto_prize/.
“The Kyoto prize”: “Kyoto Prize 2015: Inamori Foundation Announces This Year’s Laureates,”
June 19, 2015, goo.gl/kYNzdJ.
“two strong women”: Peggy Shannon, interviewed by the authors, December 9, 2015.
“I don’t know how history is taught,” etc.: Shannon, “Development of Communication and
Computing, and My Hobby.”

Chapter 31: The Illness
“She is leaving him”: Debra Dean, The Madonnas of Leningrad (New York: Harper Perennial,
2007), 119.
“Claude was never a person”: Robert Gallager, interviewed by the authors, August 8, 2014.
“Do you juggle?”: Peggy Shannon, interviewed by the authors, December 9, 2015.
“In 1983, he went to a doctor”: Betty Shannon, interviewed by the authors, November 12,
2015.
“very quiet”: Quoted in “Claude Shannon: Father of the Information Age.”
“They felt like they’d earned” . . . “She was the primary caretaker” . . . “There were days”: Peggy
Shannon, interviewed by the authors, December 9, 2015.
“I asked him something”: Robert Fano, interviewed by the authors, October 23, 2015.
“Oddly enough”: Betty Shannon, interviewed by the authors, November 12, 2015.
speed finally approached, but did not break, the Shannon Limit: These were the “turbo codes”
discovered by Claude Berrou and colleagues. Codes capable of a similar speed had been
discovered by Robert Gallager in 1960, but “the decoding process he proposed was simply
too complicated for 1960s-era technology.” See Øyvind Ytrehus, “An Introduction to Turbo
Codes and Iterative Decoding,” Telektronikk 98, no. 1 (2002): 65–78; Larry Hardesty,
“Explained: Gallager Codes,” MIT News, January 21, 2010, news.mit.edu/2010/gallagercodes-0121.
“The sides of his personality”: Peggy Shannon, interviewed by the authors, December 9, 2015.
“The last time I saw Claude”: Arthur Lewbel, interviewed by the authors, August 8, 2014.
“home was a real refuge” . . . “she was very devoted”: Peggy Shannon, interviewed by the
authors, December 9, 2015.

“at noon I’d go over” . . . “He still liked”: Betty Shannon, interviewed by the authors, November
12, 2015.

Chapter 32: Aftershocks
“The true spirit of delight”: Bertrand Russell, “The Study of Mathematics,” in Mysticism and
Logic and Other Essays (London: Longman, 1919).
“A uniquely playful” . . . “Shannon radiated”: “Remembering Claude Shannon.”
“the logical and natural development”: Ibid.
“[His] ideas form a beautiful symphony”: Ibid.
“It was like an earthquake”: Anthony Ephremides, interviewed by the authors, May 31, 2016.
“For many scientists”: Michael Urheber. Bava’s Gift: Awakening to the Impossible.
“all the advanced signal processing”: Quoted in “Claude Shannon: Father of the Information
Age.”
“In our age”: Quoted in Mark Semenovich Pinsker, “Reflections of Some Shannon Lecturers,”
IEEE Information Theory Society Newsletter, Summer 1998, 22.
“For him, the harder a problem”: George Johnson, “Claude Shannon, Mathematician, Dies at
84,” New York Times, February 27, 2001.
“Courage is one of the things”: Richard Hamming, “You and Your Research,” lecture, Bell
Communications

Research

Colloquium

Seminar,

March

7,

1986,

www.cs.virginia.edu/~robins/YouAndYourResearch.html.
“When you work with someone like Shannon”: Leonard Kleinrock, interviewed by the authors,
September 16, 2016.
“I’ve been more interested”: Shannon, interviewed by John Horgan (unpublished).
“He was not interested”: Henry Pollak, interviewed by the authors, August 7, 2014.
“Shannon’s puzzle-solving”: Robert Gallager, “The Impact of Information Theory on
Information Technology,” lecture slides, February 28, 2006.
“Dear Dennis”: Quoted in John Horgan, “Poetic Masterpiece of Claude Shannon, Father of
Information Theory, Published for the First Time,” Scientific American, March 28, 2011,
blogs.scientificamerican.com/cross-check/poetic-masterpiece-of-claude-shannon-fatherof-information-theory-published-for-the-first-time.

Acknowledgments

“Modern man”: Arthur Koestler, The Act of Creation (London: Hutchinson, 1976), 264.

Bibliography

Books and Articles
Aftab, Omar, et al. “Information Theory and the Digital Age.”
web.mit.edu/6.933/www/Fall2001/Shannon2.pdf.
Allen, Garland E. “The Eugenics Record Office at Cold Spring Harbor:
An Essay in Institutional History.” Osiris 2, no. 2 (1986): 225–64.
Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin
and Spread of Nationalism. Rev. ed. New York: Verso, 2006.
Aspray, William. “The Scientific Conceptualization of Information: A
Survey.” IEEE Annals of the History of Computing 7, no. 2 (1985): 117–
40.
“The Atlantic Telegraph Expedition.” Times (London), July 15, 1858.
Auden, W. H. “Foreword.” In Dag Hammarskjöld, Markings. New York:
Knopf, 1964.
Bandara, Lashi. “Explainer: The Point of Pure Mathematics.” The
Conversation, August 1, 2011. theconversation.com/explainer-the-

point-of-pure-mathematics-2385.
Barzman, Norma. The Red and the Blacklist: The Intimate Memoir of a
Hollywood Expatriate. New York: Nation Books, 2003.
Beauzamy, Bernard. “Real Life Mathematics.” Lecture, Dublin
Mathematical

Society,

February

2001.

scmsa.eu/archives/BB_real_life_maths_2001.htm.
Beek, Peter J., and Arthur Lewbel. “The Science of Juggling.” Scientific
American 273, no. 5 (November 1995): 92–97.
Bello, Francis. “The Information Theory.” Fortune, December 1953,
136–158.
———. “The Young Scientists.” Fortune, June 1954, 142–48.
Blackman, R. B., H. W. Bode, and C. E. Shannon. “Data Smoothing and
Prediction in Fire-Control Systems.” Summary Technical Report of
Division 7, NDRC, Volume I: Gunfire Control, ed. Harold Hazen.
Washington, DC: Office of Scientific Research and Development,
National Defense Research Committee, 1946.
Branford, Benchara. A Study of Mathematical Education. Oxford:
Clarendon, 1908.
Brewer, Brock. “The Man-Machines May Talk First to Dr. Shannon.”
Vogue, April 15, 1963, 139.

“A Brief History of Gaylord Community Schools—1920 to 1944.”
Otsego County Herald Times, May 2, 1957. goo.gl/oVb0pT.
Brown, Anne S. “Historical Study: The National Security Agency
Scientific Advisory Board, 1952–1963.” Washington, DC: NSA
Historian, Office of Central Reference, 1965.
Brueggeman, Brenda Jo. Deaf Subjects: Between Identities and Places.
New York: New York University Press, 2009.
Burke, Colin B. It Wasn’t All Magic: The Early Struggle to Automate
Cryptanalysis, 1930s–1960s. United States Cryptologic History, Special
Series, Volume 6. Center for Cryptologic History. Washington, DC:
National Security Agency, 2002.
Burks, Frances Williston. Barbara’s Philippine Journey. Yonkers-onHudson, NY: World Book, 1921.
Bush, Vannevar. “As We May Think.” Atlantic, July 1945.
———. Pieces of the Action. New York: Morrow, 1970.
Carter, Samuel. Cyrus Field: Man of Two Worlds. New York: Putnam,
1968.
Cerny,

Melinda.

“Engineering

Industry

Honors

Hometown.” Otsego Herald Times, September 3, 1998.

Shannon,

His

Chiu, Eugene, et al. “Mathematical Theory of Claude Shannon.”
December 2001. web.mit.edu/6.933/www/Fall2001/Shannon1.pdf.
Clarke, Arthur C. Voice Across the Sea: The Story of Deep Sea CableLaying, 1858–1958. London: Muller, 1958.
“Claude Shannon Demonstrates Machine Learning.” Bell Laboratories,
2014. www.youtube.com/watch?v=vPKkXibQXGA.
“Claude Shannon: Father of the Information Age.” University of
California Television, 2002. www.youtube.com/watch?v=z2Whj_nLx8.
Clymer, A. Ben. “The Mechanical Analog Computers of Hannibal Ford
and William Newell.” IEEE Annals of the History of Computing 15, no. 2
(1993): 19–34.
Cocks, James Fraser, and Cathy Abernathy. Pictorial History of Ann
Arbor, 1824–1974. Ann Arbor: Michigan Historical Collections/Bentley
Historical Library Ann Arbor Sesquicentennial Committee, 1974.
Conway, Flo, and Jim Siegelman. Dark Hero of the Information Age: In
Search of Norbert Wiener, The Father of Cybernetics. New York: Basic,
2005.
Cook, Gareth. “The Singular Mind of Terry Tao.” New York Times, July
24, 2015.

Coughlin, Kevin. “Claude Shannon: The Genius of the Digital Age.”
Star-Ledger (New Jersey), February 28, 2001.
Crawford, Matthew. Shop Class as Soulcraft: An Inquiry into the Value
of Work. New York: Penguin, 2010.
Crow, James F. “Shannon’s Brief Foray Into Genetics.” Genetics 159,
no. 3 (2001): 915–17.
Davenport, C. B. Naval Officers: Their Heredity and Development.
Washington, DC: Carnegie Institution of Washington, 1919.
Dean, Debra. The Madonnas of Leningrad. New York: Harper Perennial,
2007.
De Cogan, Donard. “Dr. E.O.W. Whitehouse and the 1858 TransAtlantic Cable.” History of Technology 10 (1985): 1–15.
De Rosa, L. A. “In Which Fields Do We Graze?” IRE Transactions on
Information Theory 1, no. 3 (1955): 2.
Dembart, Lee. “Book Review: Putting on Thinking Caps Over Artificial
Intelligence.” Los Angeles Times, August 15, 1989.
Diaconis, Persi, and Ron Graham. Magical Mathematics. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 2012.
Doob, J. L. “Review of A Mathematical Theory of Communication.”
Mathematical Review 10 (1949): 133.

Dunkel, Otto, H. L. Olson, and W. F. Cheney, Jr. “Problems and
Solutions.” American Mathematical Monthly 41, no. 3 (March 1934):
188–89.
“Enrico Rastelli.” Vanity Fair, February 1932, 49.
Ephremides, Anthony. “Claude E. Shannon 1916–2001.” IEEE
Information Theory Society Newsletter, March 2001.
Feynman, Richard P. Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman. Reprint ed.
New York: Norton, 1997.
Fisher, Lawrence. “Bernard M. Oliver Is Dead at 79; Led HewlettPackard Research.” New York Times, November 28, 1995.
Freeman, John Ripley. “Study No. 7 for New Buildings for the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.” MIT Libraries, Institute
Archives

and

Special

Collections.

libraries.mit.edu/archives/exhibits/freeman.
Freudenthal, Hans. “Norbert Wiener.” In Complete Dictionary of
Scientific

Biography.

www.encyclopedia.com/people/science-and-

technology/mathematics-biographies/norbert-wiener
Friedman, Norman. Naval Firepower: Battleship Guns and Gunnery in
the Dreadnought Era. Barnsley, England: Seaforth, 2008.
Frize, Monique, Peter Frize, and Nadine Faulkner. The Bold and the
Brave. Ottawa, Canada: University of Ottawa Press, 2009.

Fry, Thornton C. “Industrial Mathematics.” Bell Systems Technical
Journal 20, no. 3 (July 1941): 255–92.
Fussell, Paul. Class: A Guide Through the American Status System.
Reissue ed. New York: Touchstone, 1992.
Gallager, Robert G. “Claude E. Shannon: A Retrospective on His Life,
Work, and Impact.” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 47, no. 7
(2001): 2681–95.
———.

“The

Impact

of

Information

Theory

on

Information

Technology.” Lecture slides. February 28, 2006.
“Gaylord Locals.” Otsego County Herald Times, November 15, 1934.
“Gaylord’s Claude Shannon: ‘Einstein of Mathematical Theory.’ ”
Gaylord Herald Times, October 11, 2000.
Gertner, Jon. The Idea Factory: Bell Labs and the Great Age of American
Innovation. New York: Penguin, 2012.
Gifford, Walter. “The Prime Incentive.” Bell Laboratories Records. Vols.
1 and 2. September 1925–September 1926.
Gleick, James. The Information: A History, a Theory, a Flood. New York:
Pantheon, 2011.
Golomb, Solomon W. “Claude Elwood Shannon.” Notices of the AMS
49, no. 1 (2001): 8–10.

———. “Retrospective: Claude E. Shannon (1916–2001).” Science, April
20, 2001.
Graham, C. Wallace, et al., eds. 1934 Michiganensian. Ann Arbor,
Michigan, 1934.
Guizzo, Erico Marui. “The Essential Message: Claude Shannon and the
Making of Information Theory.” MS diss., Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 2003.
Hamming,

Richard.

“You

and

Your

Research.”

Lecture,

Bell

Communications Research Colloquium Seminar, March 7, 1986.
www.cs.virginia.edu/~robins/YouAndYourResearch.html.
Hapgood, Fred. Up the Infinite Corridor: MIT and the Technical
Imagination. New York: Basic Books, 1994.
Hardesty, Larry. “Explained: Gallager Codes.” MIT News, January 21,
2010. news.mit.edu/2010/gallager-codes-0121.
Hardy, G. H. A Mathematician’s Apology. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2013.
Harpster, Jack. John Ogden, The Pilgrim (1609–1682): A Man of More
than Ordinary Mark. Cranbury, NJ: Associated University Presses,
2006.
Hartley, Ralph. “Transmission of Information,” Bell System Technical
Journal 7, no. 3 (July 1928): 535–63.

Hartree, D. R. “The Bush Differential Analyzer and Its Applications.”
Nature 146 (September 7, 1940): 319–23.
Hatch, David A., and Robert Louis Benson. “The Korean War: The
SIGINT

Background.”

National

Security

Agency.

www.nsa.gov/public_info/declass/korean_war/sigint_bg.shtml.
Hodges, Andrew. Alan Turing: The Enigma. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1983.
———. “Alan Turing as UK-USA Link, 1942 Onwards.” Alan Turing
Internet Scrapbook. www.turing.org.uk/scrapbook/ukusa.html.
Horgan, John. “Claude E. Shannon: Unicyclist, Juggler, and Father of
Information Theory.” Scientific American, January 1990.
———. “Poetic Masterpiece of Claude Shannon, Father of Information
Theory, Published for the First Time.” Scientific American, March 28,
2011.

blogs.scientificamerican.com/cross-check/poetic-masterpiece-

of-claude-shannon-father-of-information-theory-published-for-thefirst-time/.
Hunt, Bruce J. “Scientists, Engineers, and Wildman Whitehouse:
Measurement and Credibility in Early Cable Telegraphy.” British
Journal for the History of Science 29, no. 2 (1996): 155–69.
Inamori, Kazuo. “Philosophy.” Inamori Foundation, April 12, 1984.
www.inamori-f.or.jp/en/kyoto_prize/.

“Institute Reports on Claude Shannon.” Otsego County Herald Times,
February 8, 1940.
INTOSAI Standing Committee on IT Audit. “1 + 1 = 1: A Tale of
Genius.” IntoIT 18 (2003): 52–57.
Isaacson, Walter. The Innovators: How a Group of Inventors, Hackers,
Geniuses, and Geeks Created the Digital Revolution. New York: Simon &
Schuster, 2014.
Jain, Naresh. “Record of the Celebration of the Life of Joseph Leo
Doob.” www.math.uiuc.edu/People/doob_record.html.
Jerison, David, I. M. Singer, and Daniel W. Stroock, eds. The Legacy of
Norbert Wiener: A Centennial Symposium in Honor of the 100th
Anniversary

of

Norbert

Wiener’s

Birth,

October

8–14,

1994,

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society, 1997.
Johnson, George. “Claude Shannon, Mathematician, Dies at 84.” New
York Times, February 27, 2001.
———. Fire in the Mind. New York: Vintage, 1995.
Johnson, W. E. “The Logical Calculus.” Mind: A Quarterly Review of
Psychology and Philosophy 1 (1892): 3–30, 235–50, 340–57.
Kahn, David. The Codebreakers: The Story of Secret Writing. New York:
Macmillan, 1953.

———. How I Discovered World War II’s Greatest Spy and Other Stories
of Intelligence and Code. Boca Raton, FL: Auerbach, 2014.Kahn, Robert
E. “A Tribute to Claude E. Shannon.” IEEE Communications Magazine,
July 2001, 18–22.
Kaplan, Fred. “Scientists at War.” American Heritage 34, no. 4 (June
1983): 49–64.
Kettlewell, Julie. “Gaylord Honors ‘Father to the Information Theory.’ ”
Otsego Herald Times, September 3, 1998.
Kimball, Warren F., ed. Churchill and Roosevelt: The Complete
Correspondence. Vol. 3. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1984.
Kipling, Rudyard. “The Deep Sea Cables.” In Rudyard Kipling’s Verse.
Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Page, 1922.
Kline, Ronald R. The Cybernetics Moment: Or Why We Call Our Age the
Information Age. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2015.
Koestler, Arthur. The Act of Creation. London: Hutchinson, 1976.
Lewbel,

Arthur.

“A

Personal

Tribute

to

Claude

Shannon.”

www2.bc.edu/~lewbel/Shannon.html.
Lewes, George Henry. The Principles of Success in Literature. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1901.

Livingston, G. R. “Problems for Solution.” American Mathematical
Monthly 41, no. 6 (June 1934): 390.
Lucky, Robert W. Silicon Dreams: Information, Man, and Machine. New
York: St. Martin’s, 1991.
MacKay, David J. C. Information Theory, Inference, and Learning
Algorithms Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Massey, James L. “Information Theory: The Copernican System of
Communications.” IEEE Communications Magazine 22, no. 12 (1984):
26–28.
McEliece, R. J. The Theory of Information and Coding: Student Edition.
New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Merzbach, Uta C., and Carl B. Boyer. A History of Mathematics. 3rd ed.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
Minck, John. “Inside HP: A Narrative History of Hewlett-Packard from
1939–1990.”
www.hpmemoryproject.org/timeline/john_minck/inside_hp_03.htm.
Mindell, David A. “Automation’s Finest Hour: Bell Labs and Automatic
Control in WWII.” IEEE Control Systems 15 (1995): 72–80.
———. Between Human and Machine: Feedback, Control, and
Computing before Cybernetics. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 2002.

“MIT Professor Claude Shannon dies; Was Founder of Digital
Communications.”

MIT

News,

February

27,

2001.

newsoffice.mit.edu/2001/shannon.
Mitchell, Silas Weir. “The Last of a Veteran Chess Player.” Chess
Monthly, 1857.
Morse, Philip McCord. In at the Beginnings: A Physicist’s Life.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1977.
Moulton-Barrett, Maria. Graphotherapy. New York: Trafford, 2005.
“Mouse with a Memory.” Time, May 19, 1952, 59–60.
“Mrs. Mabel Shannon Dies in Chicago,” Otsego County Herald Times,
December 27, 1945.
Nahin, Paul J. The Logician and the Engineer: How George Boole and
Claude Shannon Created the Information Age. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2013.
Nasar, Sylvia. A Beautiful Mind: The Life of Mathematical Genius and
Nobel Laureate John Nash. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1998.
National Register of Historic Places application. Edmund Dwight
House. Massachusetts Cultural Resource Information System. mhcmacris.net/Details.aspx?MhcId=WNT.19.

Norberg, Arthur L. “An Interview with Bernard More Oliver.” Charles
Babbage Institute for the History of Information Processing, August 9,
1985.
“NSA Regulation Number 11-3.” National Security Agency, January 22,
1953.
ia601409.us.archive.org/16/items/41788579082758/41788579082758.pdf
Nyquist, Harry. “Certain Factors Affecting Telegraph Speed.” Bell
System Technical Journal (April 1924): 324–46.
———.

“Certain

Topics

in

Telegraph

Transmission

Theory.”

Transactions of the AIEE 47 (April 1928): 617–44.
“Obituary: Thornton Carl Fry.” American Astronomical Society,
January 1, 1991.
Oliver, B., J. Pierce, and C. Shannon. “The Philosophy of PCM.”
Proceedings of the IRE 36, no. 11 (November 1948): 1324–31.
O’Neill, Bradley. “Dead Medium: The Comparator; the Rapid Selector.”
www.deadmedia.org/notes/1/017.html.
Owens, F. W., and Helen B. Owens. “Mathematics Clubs—Junior
Mathematics Club, University of Michigan.” American Mathematical
Monthly 43, no. 10 (December 1936): 636.
Owens, Larry. “Vannevar Bush and the Differential Analyzer: The Text
and Context of an Early Computer.” Technology and Culture 27, no. 1

(1986): 63–95.
Perkins, Thomas. Valley Boy: The Education of Tom Perkins. New York:
Gotham, 2007.
Perry, John. The Calculus for Engineers. London: Edward Arnold, 1897.
Pierce, John. “Creative Thinking.” Lecture. 1951.
———. “The Early Days of Information Theory.” IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory 19, no. 1 (1973): 3–8.
———. An Introduction to Information Theory: Symbols, Signals, and
Noise. 2nd ed. New York: Dover, 1980.
Pinsker, Mark Semenovich. “Reflections of Some Shannon Lecturers.”
IEEE Information Theory Society Newsletter (Summer 1998): 22–23.
Platt, John. “Books That Make a Year’s Reading and a Lifetime’s
Enrichment.” New York Times, February 2, 1964.
Poe, Edgar Allan. “The Gold-Bug.” In The Gold-Bug and Other Tales. Ed.
Stanley Appelbaum. Mineola, NY: Dover, 1991.
———. “Maelzel’s Chess Player.” In The Complete Tales of Edgar Allan
Poe. New York: Vintage Books, 1975.
Polster,

Burkard.

“The

Mathematics

qedcat.com/articles/juggling_survey.pdf.

of

Juggling.”

Poundstone, William. Fortune’s Formula: The Untold Story of the
Scientific Betting System That Beat the Casinos and Wall Street. New
York: Hill & Wang, 2005.
———. How to Predict the Unpredictable: The Art of Outsmarting
Almost Anyone. New York: Oneworld, 2014.
Powers, Perry Francis, and H. G. Cutler. A History of Northern Michigan
and Its People. Chicago: Lewis, 1912.
Price, Robert. “A Conversation with Claude Shannon: One Man’s
Approach to Problem Solving.” IEEE Communications Magazine 22, no.
6 (May 1984): 123–26.
———. “Oral History: Claude E. Shannon.” IEEE Global History
Network,

July

28,

1982.

www.ieeeghn.org/wiki/index.php/Oral-

History:Claude_E._Shannon.
Ratcliff, J. D. “Brains.” Collier’s, January 17, 1942.
Rees, Mina. “Warren Weaver.” In National Academy of Sciences,
Biographical Memoirs, vol. 57. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press, 1987.
“Remembering Claude Shannon.” Roy Rosenzweig Center for History
and New Media, George Mason University, March–August 2001.
chnm.gmu.edu/digitalhistory/links/cached/chapter6/6_19b_surveyresponse.htm.

Report of the Joint Committee to Inquire into the Construction of
Submarine Telegraph Cables. London: Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1861.
Rheingold, Howard. Tools for Thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2000.
Rosser, J. Barkley. “Mathematics and Mathematicians in World War II.”
In A Century of Mathematics in America, Part 1. Ed. Peter Duren.
Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society, 1988.
Russell, Bertrand. “The Study of Mathematics.” In Mysticism and Logic
and Other Essays. London: Longman, 1919.
Sagan, Carl. Pale Blue Dot: A Vision of the Human Future in Space. New
York: Random House, 1994.
Saxon, Wolfgang. “Albert G. Hill, 86, Who Helped Develop Radar in
World War II.” New York Times, October 29, 1996.
Schement, Jorge Reina, and Brent D. Ruben. Between Communication
and Information 4. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 1993.
Shannon, Claude Elwood. “The Bandwagon.” IRE Transactions
—Information Theory 2, no. 1 (1956): 3.
———. Claude Elwood Shannon: Collected Papers. Ed. N. J. A. Sloane
and Aaron D. Wyner. New York: IEEE Press, 1992.

———. Claude Shannon’s Miscellaneous Writings. Ed. N. J. A. Sloane
and Aaron D. Wyner. Murray Hill, NJ: Mathematical Sciences Research
Center, AT&T Bell Laboratories, 1993.
———. “Development of Communication and Computing, and My
Hobby.” Lecture, Inamori Foundation, Kyoto, Japan, November 1985.
www.kyotoprize.org/wp/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/1kB_lct_EN.pdf.
———. “A Mathematical Theory of Communication.” Bell System
Technical Journal 27 (July, October 1948): 379–423, 623–56.
———. “Problems and Solutions—E58.” American Mathematical
Monthly 41, no. 3 (March 1934): 191–92.———. “A Symbolic Analysis
of Relay and Switching Circuits.” Transactions of the American
Institute of Electrical Engineers 57 (1938): 471–95.
———. “A Theorem on Color Coding.” Bell Laboratories. Memorandum
40-130-153. July 8, 1940.
———. “The Use of the Lakatos-Hickman Relay in a Subscriber
Sender.” Bell Laboratories. Memorandum 40-130-179. August 3, 1940.
Sicilia, David B. “How the West Was Wired.” Inc., June 1997.
Snell,

J.

Laurie.

“A

Conversation

with

Joe

Doob.”

1997.

www.dartmouth.edu/~chance/Doob/conversation.html.
Standage, Tom. The Turk: The Life and Times of the Famous
Eighteenth-Century Chess-Playing Machine. New York: Walker, 2002.

“Step Back in Time: A New County Seat and the First Newspaper.”
Gaylord Herald Times, reprinted January 6, 2016.
Sterling,

Christopher

H.

“Churchill

and

Intelligence—Sigsaly:

Beginning the Digital Revolution.” Finest Hour 149 (Winter 2010–11):
31.
Sutin, Hillard A. “A Tribute to Mortimer E. Cooley.” Michigan Technic,
March 1935.
Sutton, R. M. “Problems for Solution.” American Mathematical
Monthly 40, no. 8 (October 1933): 491.
Thomson, Silvanus P. The Life of William Thomson, Baron Kelvin of
Largs. London: Macmillan, 1910.
Thomson, William. “The Tides: Evening Lecture to the British
Association at the Southampton Meeting, August 25, 1882.” In
Thomson, Scientific Papers, vol. 30. Ed. Charles W. Eliot. New York:
Collier & Son, 1910.
Thorp, Edward O. “The Invention of the First Wearable Computer.”
Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE International Symposium on Wearable
Computers, October 1998, 4–8.
Tompkins, Dave. How to Wreck a Nice Beach: The Vocoder from World
War II to Hip-Hop: The Machine Speaks. Chicago: Stop Smiling Books,
2011.

Trew, Delbert. “Barbed Wire Telegraph Lines Brought Gossip and News
to Farm and Ranch.” Farm Collector, September 2003.
Tribus, Myron, and Edward C. McIrving. “Energy and Information.”
Scientific American 225 (1971): 179–88.
Turing, Alan. “Alan Turing’s Report from Washington DC, November
1942.”
Van den Herik, H. J. “An Interview with Claude Shannon (September
25, 1980 in Linz, Austria).” ICCA Journal 12, no. 4 (1989): 221–26.
“Vannevar Bush: General of Physics.” Time, April 3, 1944.
Von Foerster, Heinz, Margaret Mead, and Hans Lukas Teuber, eds.
Cybernetics: Transactions of the Eighth Conference March 15–16, 1951.
New York: Josiah Macy, Jr. Foundation, 1952.
Von Neumann, John. “First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC.” In The
Origins of Digital Computers: Selected Papers. Ed. Brian Randell. New
York: Springer-Verlag, 1973.
Waldrop, W. Mitchell. “Claude Shannon: Reluctant Father of the
Digital

Age.”

MIT

Technology

Review,

July

1,

2001.

www.technologyreview.com/s/401112/claude-shannon-reluctantfather-of-the-digital-age.
Weaver, Warren. “Careers in Science.” In Listen to Leaders in Science.
Ed. Albert Love and James Saxon Childers. Atlanta: Tupper &

Love/David McKay, 1965.
———. “Four Pieces of Advice to Young People.” In The Project Physics
Course Reader: Concepts of Motion. Ed. Gerald Holton et al. New York:
Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1970.
———. Science and Imagination: Selected Papers. New York: Basic
Books, 1967.
Weyl, Hermann. Space—Time—Matter. 4th ed. Trans. Henry L. Brose.
New York: Dover, 1950.
Whaland, Norman. “A Computer Chess Tutorial.” Byte, October 1978,
168–81.
Whitehouse, E. O. Wildman. “The Law of Squares—Is It Applicable or
Not to the Transmission of Signals in Submarine Circuits?”
Athenaeum, August 30, 1856, 1092–93.
———. “Report on a Series of Experimental Observations on Two
Lengths of Submarine Electric Cable, Containing, in the Aggregate,
1,125 Miles of Wire, Being the Substance of a Paper Read Before the
British Association for the Advancement of Science, at Glasgow, Sept.
14th, 1855.” Brighton, England, 1855.
“Who We Are.” Douglass Residential College, Rutgers University.
douglass.rutgers.edu/history.

Wiener, Norbert. Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in the
Animal and the Machine. 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1961.
———. Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1964.
Wildes, Karl L., and Nilo A. Lindgren. A Century of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science at MIT, 1882–1982. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1986.
Wilson, Philip K. “Harry Laughlin’s Eugenic Crusade to Control the
‘Socially Inadequate’ in Progressive Era America.” Patterns of Prejudice
36, no. 1 (2002): 49–67.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Philosophical Investigations. Trans. G. E. M.
Anscombe et al. Ed. P. M. S. Hacker and Joachim Schulte. 4th ed.
Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2009.
“Youthful Instructor Wins Noble Award.” New York Times, January 24,
1940.
Ytrehus, Øyvind. “An Introduction to Turbo Codes and Iterative
Decoding.” Telektronikk 98, no. 1 (2002): 65–78.
Zachary, G. Pascal. Endless Frontier: Vannevar Bush, Engineer of the
American Century. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999.
Zorpette, Glenn. “Parkinson’s Gun Director.” IEEE Spectrum 26, no. 4
(1989): 43.

Archival Material
Claude Elwood Shannon Papers. Library of Congress. Washington, DC.
Claude Shannon Alumnus File. Bentley Historical Library. University
of Michigan. Ann Arbor, MI.
Claude Shannon Alumnus File. Seeley Mudd Library. Princeton
University. Princeton, NJ.
Institute of Communications Research Records. University of Illinois
Archives. Urbana, IL.
Kelvin Collection. University of Glasgow. Glasgow, Scotland.
Office of the President Records. MIT Archive. Cambridge, MA.
Vannevar Bush Papers. Library of Congress. Washington, DC.
Warren S. McCulloch Papers. American Philosophical Society.
Philadelphia, PA.
Interviews
Barzman, Norma. Interviewed by the authors, December 21, 2014.
Ephremides, Anthony. Interviewed by the authors, May 31, 2016.
Fano, Robert. Interviewed by the authors, October 23, 2015.

Fry, Thornton C. Interviewed by Deirdre M. La Porte, Henry O. Pollak,
and G. Baley Price, January 3–4, 1981.
Gallager, Robert. Interviewed by the authors, August 8, 2014.
Graham, Ronald. Interviewed by the authors, August, 23, 2014.
Greenberger, Martin. Interviewed by the authors, May 5, 2016.
Jacobs, Irwin. Interviewed by the authors, January 1, 2015.
Kailath, Thomas. Interviewed by the authors, June 2, 2016.
Kleinrock, Leonard. Interviewed by the authors, September 16, 2016.
Lewbel, Arthur. Interviewed by the authors, August 8, 2014.
McMillan, Brockway. Interviewed by the authors, January 4, 2016.
Moulton-Barrett, Maria. Interviewed by the authors, January 2, 2015,
and January 21, 2016.
Pollak, Henry. Interviewed by the authors, August 7, 2014.
Roberts, Larry. Interviewed by the authors, September 26, 2016.
Shannon, Betty. Interviewed by the authors, November 12, 2015.
Shannon, Claude. Interviewed by Friedrich-Wilhelm Hagemeyer,
February 28, 1977.

Shannon, Claude, and Betty Shannon. Interviewed by Donald J. Albers,
1990.
Shannon, Peggy. Interviewed by the authors, December 9, 2015.
Thorp, Edward. Interviewed by the authors, March 21, 2016.
Verdú, Sergio. Interviewed by the authors, September 6, 2015.

Index

A note about the index: The pages referenced in this index refer to the page numbers in
the print edition. Clicking on a page number will take you to the ebook location that
corresponds to the beginning of that page in the print edition. For a comprehensive list of
locations of any word or phrase, use your reading system’s search function.
abstraction, CS’s genius for, 46
Agamemnon, HMS, 120, 121
Alfred Noble Prize, 48
“Algebra for Theoretical Genetics, An” (Shannon), 53–60
Alice in Many Tongues (Weaver), 85
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland (Carroll), 85, 234
alleles, 55
All Souls College, Oxford, 259–60
Alzheimer’s disease, 268–71
American Journal of Psychology, 250–51
American Mathematical Monthly, 19
American Mathematical Society, 174
American Philosophical Society, 259
American Telephone & Telegraph (AT&T), 65, 66, 205
Anderson, Benedict, 75
Ann Arbor, Mich., 13–14, 34, 293n
Ann Arbor Daily News, 14
anti-aircraft guns, 86–89
Apollonius, 250
Apollo Theater, 110

Apple II computer, 266
Archimedes, 32, 250
Armed Forces Security Agency (AFSA), 194, 196
Army, U.S., 81, 97, 194, 198
Army Air Service, U.S., 83
Army Signal Corps, 88
artificial intelligence, 76, 266
chess-playing computers and, xv, 211, 212–14
CS on future of, 207–9, 215–16
Theseus as rudimentary example of, 204, 205–7
Ashkelon, Israel, 261
automobiles, 265
“Baby Ford,” 27
Baghdad, 250
Baker, Bill, 226
“Bandwagon, The” (Shannon), 189–92
bandwidth, information and, 127–28, 135–36
Banquet, The (Xenophon), 253
Barbara’s Philippine Journey (Burks), 52
Bardeen, John, 67
Barnard, Chester, 166–67
Baruch, Bernard, 240
Bateson, Gregory, 178
Beauzamy, Bernard, 61
Beethoven, Ludwig van, 9, 265
Beiderbecke, Bix, 62
Bell, Alexander Graham, 66, 123, 126, 265
Bell Laboratories, 74, 81, 115, 123, 126, 128, 131, 136, 137, 141, 156, 165, 181, 182, 187, 193,
195, 199–200, 211, 217, 229, 233, 235, 239, 249, 259, 273, 277
Betty Shannon and, 183–84
cryptography work of, 98–102, 103, 105
CS hired by, 90

CS’s continued employment by, 226
CS’s freedom at, 68, 114, 199–200, 225
CS’s friendships at, 111–14
CS’s resignation from, 225–26
CS’s summer fellowship at, 63, 64, 71–72
CS’s summer internship at, 38
CS’s Theseus project and, 204–5
intellectual freedom of, xiii, 66–68, 70, 225
inventions and discoveries of, 67
math group at, 65, 68–71, 86, 199
philosophy of, 66–67, 70
Turing’s visit to, 103–4, 105, 107–8
World War II and, 86–90, 91, 93–95, 98–101, 103, 105
Bello, Francis, 186–87, 188
Bell System, 126, 127, 130–31
Bell System Technical Journal, 68, 161, 165, 166, 186
Bell Telephone Company, 178
Bennett, William, 98
Berkeley Heights, N.J., 184
Berlekamp, Elwyn, 261
Berrou, Claude, 325n
bits (binary digits), 236, 309n
choice and, 141
CS’s introduction of, 141
as fundamental unit of information, xiv, 154
redundancy and, 159–60
Blackman, Ralph, 85
Bletchley Park, 93
Bôcher Memorial Prize, 74
Bode, Hendrik, 85, 225
Bohr, Niels, 131
Boltzmann, Ludwig, 125
BOMBE, 96

Boole, George, 35–37, 38–39, 40, 42, 130
Boolean algebra, 35–37, 38–39, 40–41, 54, 72, 140
Born, Max, 263
Boston, Mass., 63, 79, 177
Boston Globe, 248
Botvinnik, Mikhail, 211–12
Boyer, Carl, 172
Boy Scouts, 10–11
Brattain, Walter, 67
Brewer, Brock, 207–8
Brighton, England, xi
British navy, 294n
Brunn, Lottie, 253
Buddhism, 263
Buffon’s Needle, 234
Burke, Colin, 96–97
Burks, Barbara Stoddard, 52–53, 58–59, 60
Bush, Vannevar, 21–24, 27–31, 33–34, 38, 43, 51, 53, 54, 59, 60, 63, 73, 75, 77, 91, 99–100,
166, 177
analog computers of, 28, 29–30
CS’s genius recognized by, 20, 22, 33, 48
as CS’s mentor, xii, 48–49, 58, 64–65, 74, 93
on CS’s personality, 47–48
differential analyzer of, see differential analyzer
electrical grid project of, 24, 28, 30
Eugenics Record Office closed by, 50
NDRC and, 81–82
Profile Tracker of, 21–22, 25, 27–28, 31
specialization disliked by, 49
as teacher, 22–23, 28–29
as tinkerer, 22–23
Byte, 212

Caissac (chess-playing computer), 215, 266
calculus, 23–24, 29, 54
California, 80, 226, 227
California, University of, at Los Angeles, 243
California Institute of Technology (Caltech), 83
Cambridge, England, 188
Cambridge, Mass., 28, 33, 49, 223, 272
Cambridge University, 25
Carnegie Institution of Washington, 50
Carroll, Lewis, 85, 278
Cartier-Bresson, Henri, 207–8
Cavendish Laboratory, 188
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 193, 194, 195
Chamberlain, Owen, 263
Champaign-Urbana, Ill., 167
Chandler, Raymond, 152–53
channel capacity, 157–61
Charles River, 33
chess, 199
computers and, xv, 107, 108, 209, 210–16, 266
CS’s passion for, 199, 211–12
Chicago, University of, 131
choice:
information and, 133–34, 138, 141–44
in logical statements, xiii
chromosomes, 54–55
Churchill, Winston, xiii, 67, 97–98, 150
Church of Scientology, 200–201
Civil War, U.S., 6
Clark, A. B., 100
Clarke, Arthur C., 123
Clausius, Rudolf, 125
codebreaking, see cryptography

coin tosses, probability and, 141–42
Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y., 49, 53
Cold War, 166
Collatz conjecture, 69
Collier’s, 22
COLOSSUS, 96
Columbia, Mo., 175
Columbia University, 178
communications, 16
bandwidth and, 127–28, 135–36
digital, 113
mathematics and, 76–77, 86
model for flow of, 138–40
signal vs. noise in, 119–20, 123–24, 126, 127, 179
see also information
communications science, 235–36, 262
communication theory, see information theory
“Communication Theory of Secrecy Systems” (Shannon), 152
Communist Party, 80
Como, Lake, 131
Compton, Karl Taylor, 47
computers, analog, 127
Bush and, 28, 29–30
see also differential analyzer
computers, digital:
chess-playing by, xv, 107, 108, 209, 210–16, 266
hand-held, 265–66
insights of CS and Turing as basis of, 43
mutual interest of CS and Turing in, 106–7
computers, wearable, xv, 243–46
Conant, James, 93
Conrad, Joseph, 54
Cook, Gareth, 110

Cook, James, 252
Cooley, Mortimer, 15, 16
Copernicus, 32
Cornell University, 27, 176, 183
County Kerry, Ireland, 120
Courtyard Nursing Care Center, 271
“Creative Thinking” (Shannon), 217–20
Crick, Francis, 188
cryptography, 310n
Bell Labs work on, 98–101, 105
CS’s childhood interest in, 4, 19
CS’s expertise in, xiii, 95, 101–2, 104, 152, 193–94, 195
letter frequency in, 3–4, 149–51
redundancy in, 151
Turing and, 103–6
U.S.-British mistrust and, 105–6
in World War II, 96–101, 103–6
curiosity, 218
Cybernetics (Wiener), 178, 179
Darwin, Charles, 32, 52, 170, 265
Davisson, Clinton “Davy,” 67–68
Deep Blue, xv, 213
De Morgan, Augustus, 296n
Depression, Great, 14, 34, 182, 183
De Rosa, Louis A., 189
“Development of Communication and Computing, and My Hobby” (Shannon), 265–67
Dianetics (Hubbard), 201
differential analyzer, xii–xiii, 20, 24, 30–31, 43, 266
CS’s work on, 34–35, 37
limitations on, 33
logic box of, 34, 37
differential equations, 23–24

difficulty of solving, 24
fire control and, 26–27
integrals in, 27
digital systems, definition of, 129
dissatisfaction, constructive, 218
DNA, 52, 54–55
as information source, 139–40
Doob, Joseph L., 170–74
Douglass, Kingman, 194–95
Douglass College, 183
DuBridge, Lee, 167
Dudley, Homer, 99–100
Dwight, Ellen, 227
Earth, xiv
Edgerton, Harold “Doc,” 248–49
Edison, Thomas, 265
as CS’s idol, 11–12
Egypt, 252, 253, 261
Eiffel Tower, 131
Einstein, Albert, xv, 76, 77–78, 89, 136, 184, 217, 279
CS compared to, 187
Eisenhower, Dwight, 194
electrical grids, stability of, 28
Bush’s work on, 24, 30
electric light, 265
Eliot, T. S., 111
Ellis Island, 105
Endgame (chess-playing computer), 215, 266
England, see Great Britain
English Channel, 121
ENIAC, 96, 107
ENIGMA, 96, 104

entropy, 311n
information and, 162–64
Second Law of Thermodynamics and, 162n
Entropy House (Shannon home), 227–28, 233–34, 270, 271
CS’s laboratory and workshop at, 228, 233, 244–45
Juggling Club meetings at, 249, 268–69
as pilgrimage site for students and colleagues, 228, 231–32, 233
Ephremides, Anthony, 235, 274
Erector Sets, xv, 6, 11, 203, 256
error-correcting mechanisms, 224
Escher, M. C., 278
Ethical Culture Fieldston School, 170–71
Euclid, 58, 172
eugenics, 50–51
Eugenics Record Office, 50–52, 53
evolution, synthesis of genetics and, 52
Ex-Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth (Wiener), 175
fail-safe mechanisms, 224
Fano, Robert, 114, 154, 156, 157, 192, 270
“Favorable Strategy for Twenty-One, A” (Thorp), 244
fax machine, Nyquist’s prototype of, 126–27
Fermat’s last theorem, 69
Fermi, Enrico, 131
Feynman, Richard, xv, 79, 188, 283
Fields, W. C., 253
Fine, Reuben, 214
fire control, 85–86, 294n
CS’s work on, xiii, 87–89, 93
differential equations and, 26–27
Firschke, Trixie, 253
Fischer, Bobby, 216
Fisher, Ronald, 52

Ford, Hannibal, 27–28, 30
Foreign Intelligence Service, German, 97
Forney, Dave, 161, 231
Forster, Georg, 252
Fortune, 186–87
Fourier analysis, 177
“Fourth-Dimensional Twist, or a Modest Proposal in Aid of the American Driver in England,
The” (Shannon), 259–60
Frank, Larry, 206
Franklin, Benjamin, 49
Freudenthal, Hans, 176
Frink, Orrin, 74, 75
Fry, Thornton C., 65, 67, 68–71, 74, 85, 89
as CS’s mentor, 68, 75, 81, 83, 90, 166
Fundamental Theorem for a Discrete Channel with Noise, 179
Fussell, Paul, 29
Galileo, 89, 249
Gallager, Robert, 161, 169, 184–85, 191, 229, 230, 231, 232–33, 236, 268, 279, 325n
gambling, 224–25
mafia and, 246
strategies for, 243–44
wearable computer for, 244–46
game theory, 170, 172, 240
Gates, Bill, 275
Gaylord, Mich., 4–6, 7–8, 10, 18, 34, 61, 62, 187, 257
Gaylord High School, 7
Gaylord Study Club, 7
generalization, in problem solving, 220
general relativity, theory of, 76
genes, 54–55
genetics:
CS’s application of algebra to, 53–60

CS’s research in, 48
Eugenics Record Office data and, 51–52
synthesis of Darwinian theory and, 52
genius, CS on, 218
genome, human, 58, 309n
Germany, 14
Germany, Nazi, 50, 76, 77, 86, 97, 148n, 167
missile development by, 86, 88
Gertner, Jon, 65–66, 67–68, 91, 112, 114, 200, 249
Gidden, Shirley Hutchins, 11
Gifford, Walter, 66
Glasgow, Scotland, 121
Gleick, James, 34, 163
Gödel, Kurt, 94, 177
“Gold Bug, The” (Poe), 3–4, 150, 151
Golomb, Solomon, 173–74
Google, 66
Göring, Hermann, 86
Goulding, Harvey, 15
Grace, Teddy, 79
Graham, Benjamin, 240
Graham, Ronald, 249, 250
Great Britain, 88, 97, 104, 108, 120, 259–60, 261, 294n
German air raids on, 167
U.S. mistrust of, 105–6
Great Depression, 14, 34, 182, 183
Greece, 14
Green, Hetty, 240
Greene, Charles, 15
Greenwich Village, CS’s apartment in, 110–11, 136, 182
Guernica, Spain, 86
gunnery, see fire control

Haldane, J. B. S., 52
Hamming, Richard, 277
Hampton Court Palace, maze at, 203
Hapgood, Fred, 32, 43–44
Hardy, G. H., 172, 177, 235
Harlem (New York City), 110
harmonic analyzer, 25–28
Harrison, Bill, 239
Harrison Laboratories, 239
Hartley, Ralph, 130–37, 138, 141, 143–45, 157
CS as influenced by, 130
Harvard University, 58, 168, 171, 176, 178, 224
Haus, Hermann, 230
Heaviside, Oliver, 65
Heisenberg, Werner, 131
Helmholtz, Hermann von, 125
heredity, Eugenics Record Office files on, 51–53
Hewlett-Packard (HP), 67, 112, 239, 242
Hitler, Adolf, 86
Hodges, Andrew, 99, 104
Holland, 97
Hoover, Herbert, 14
Hubbard, L. Ron, 200–201
Hudson River, 110
Huffman, David, 156
human genome, 58, 309n
Humphrey, Hubert, 258
Hungary, 182
Huron River, 13
Hutchins, Rodney, 10, 11
IBM, xv
Idea Factory, The (Gertner), 65–66

Illinois, University of, 168, 169
Institute for Communications Research at, 167
Inamori, Kazuo, 263–64
industry, mathematicians in, 68–71
information:
bandwidth and, 127–28, 135–36
bit as fundamental unit of, xiv, 154
choice and, 133–34, 138, 141–44
digitization of, 160–61
entropy and, 162–64
logarithmic scale of, 134
as measurable quantity, xii, xiii–xiv, 135, 154
noise and, xiv
probalistic nature of, 141–42
as reduction of uncertainty, 142–44
as stochastic, 145–53
transmission speed of, 154–56
uncertainty and, 311n
see also communications
Information Age, 109, 153–54, 165, 236, 275
CS on, 236–37
CS’s theory as foundation of, xii, xiv, 12, 236, 262, 270, 275
information science:
early glimpses of, 125
Hartley and, 130–37, 138, 141, 143–45, 157
Nyquist and, 126–30, 138, 141, 144, 157
information theory, 138, 192
Bello’s article on, 186–87
channel capacity in, 157–61
choice in, 141–42
criticisms of, 170, 172–74
CS as inventor of, xi–xii, xiii–xiv, 60, 101, 106, 115, 126, 181, 273–75
as foundation of Information Age, xii, xiv, 12, 262, 270, 275

Hartley as progenitor of, 130–37, 138, 141, 143–45, 157
maximum compactness theorem of, 154, 156
misunderstandings and misapplications of, 189–92
MIT as center of, 234–35, 279
Nyquist as progenitor of, 126–30, 131, 132, 133, 134, 138, 141, 144, 157, 308n
probability in, 141–44
redundancy in, 151–56
signal/noise theorem in, 156–61, 179
stochastic model in, 145–53
telegraphy in, 145
uncertainty in, 142–44
universal model in, 138–40
Weaver’s enthusiasm for, 166–67
Wiener and, 177–80
“Information Theory, The” (Bello), 186–87
Institute for Advanced Study (IAS), 63, 64, 83, 94
CS at, 74–80, 162
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Information Theory Society, 261
Institute of Radio Engineers (IRE), Professional Group on Information Theory of, 189
integrals, 27
intelligence, xiii, 61, 77, 89, 127–30, 138
see also information
International Information Theory Symposium, xi
Internet, xiv, 140, 165, 262
intersymbol interference, 136
“In Which Fields Do We Graze?” (De Rosa), 189
Iowa, University of, 168
Iowa Writers’ Workshop, 167
IQ, nature-nurture debate on, 53
Isaacson, Walter, xiii, 43
Israel, 261
Italy, 14, 131
It Wasn’t All Magic (Burke), 96–97

“Jabberwocky” (Carroll), 234
Jacobs, Irwin, 233
Japan, 97, 194, 261, 264–67
Japan Airlines, 263
jargon, 153
jazz, CS’s passion for, 61, 110, 111, 255
Jefferson, Thomas, 227
Jobs, Steve, xv, 275
Johnson, Lyndon, 258
Josiah Willard Gibbs Lecture, 174
Joyce, James, 111
juggling:
bounce vs. toss, 247, 256
CS’s bounce and toss experiment in, 247–48
CS’s lifelong interest in, xi, xv, 228, 247, 249, 250, 266
CS’s robotic jugglers, 256
CS’s unpublished paper on, 250–56, 280–81
mathematics and, 249–50, 251, 254–55
Juggling Club (MIT), 248–49, 268–69
Jupiter, 262
Jutland, Battle of, 26–27
Kahn, David, 151, 159n
Kailath, Thomas, 178–79, 234–35, 262
Kaplan, Fred, 91–92
Kaufman, Robert, 171
Kelly, John, 225
Kelly, Mervin, 193, 195
Kelvin, Lord, see Thomson, William, Lord Kelvin
Kentucky Fried Chicken, 242
King’s College, Cambridge, 103
Kipling, Rudyard, 120
Kleiner Perkins, 111

Kleinrock, Len, 229, 230, 231–32, 278
Koestler, Arthur, 283–84
Kolmogorov, Andrey, 276
Kompfner, Rudi, 259
Korean War, 197
Krankheit, Hagen (char.), 148n
Krupa, Gene, 255
Kyocera, 263
Kyoto Prize in Basic Science, 263–67
Lane Funeral Home, 271
languages:
CS’s garbled text experiment on, 146–49
letter frequency in, 3, 146–47, 149–51
redundancy in, 151–53, 158–59
stochastic nature of, 146–53
Lansing, Mich., 5, 6
Laws of Thought, The (Boole), 36
League of Nations, Economic Section of, 79
Legrand, William (char.), 3, 150, 151
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 54, 180
Lempel, Abraham, 262
Lend-Lease Act, 105
Leonardo da Vinci, 49
letter frequency, 3–4, 146–47, 149–51
Levi-Strauss, Claude, 111
Lévy, Paul, 177
Lewbel, Arthur, 78, 248, 250, 255–56, 262, 270
Lewes, George Henry, 114
Library Board (Gaylord, Mich.), 7
Life, 188, 205
Lincoln Laboratory, 224
Liversidge, Anthony, 173

logic:
binary choice in, xiii
Boolean, 35–37, 38–39, 40–41, 54, 72
digitization of, 160–61
as force multiplier, 35
logic gates, 41–42, 43
London, England, 108
Blitz in, 86
London Times, 119–20
Loomis, Alfred Lee, 167
Lord Valentine’s Castle (Silverberg), 252
Los Alamos National Laboratory, 93
Luftwaffe, 86, 167
McCulloch, Warren, 201
McEliece, R. J., 166
machines, CS’s lifelong interest in, 203–9, 233, 243
thinking, see thinking machines
McMillan, Brockway, 113–14, 211
Macy Conference (1951), 205–6
Maelzel, Johann, 210–11, 215
mafia, gambling industry and, 246
Manchester, University of, 108
Manhattan Project, 167
MANIAC, 96
“Man-Machines May Talk First to Dr. Shannon, The” (Brewer), 207–8
Manning, Charlie, 228
Marconi, Guglielmo, 265
Maric, Mileva, 184
Marietta College, 168
Marshall, George, 97
Masonic Hall (Philadelphia), 210

Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), 20, 32–34, 38, 53, 59, 154, 187, 201, 215, 226,
227, 244, 262, 266, 279
Bush at, xii, 22, 28, 29, 34–35, 49
CS as full professor at, 225, 228–33, 234–35, 236, 239, 240–41, 244, 246, 248, 261, 262,
276
CS as graduate student at, xii, 32, 34, 45–49, 61, 74, 94, 177
CS as visiting professor at, 223–25
Juggling Club at, 248–49, 268–69
Radiation Laboratory (Rad Lab) at, 167
Massey, James, 158
Mathematical Review, 172
“Mathematical Studies Relating to Fire Control” (NDRC project), 85–89
“Mathematical Theory of Communication, A” (Shannon), xiii–xiv, 138, 235, 262
response to, 165–69, 172–74
see also information theory
Mathematical Theory of Communication, The (Shannon and Weaver), 168–69, 172–74
“Mathematical Theory of Cryptography—Case 208078, A” (Shannon), 101–2
Mathematician’s Apology, A (Hardy), 172
mathematics, mathematicians:
communications and, 76–77, 86
in industry, 68–71
juggling and, 249–50, 251, 254–55
pure, 69, 171–72
in World War II, 86–90, 92–93
Mathematics of Juggling, The (Polster), 250
Maxwell, James Clerk, 162n
Mead, Debra, 268
Mead, Margaret, 206
messenger RNA, 140
Michigan, xii, 7, 8, 14, 32, 35
Michigan, University of, 14–15, 269
College of Engineering at, 15–16
CS at, 13, 15–20, 35, 39–43

Literary College at, 15
Michigan Central Railroad, 7
Mill, John Stuart, 9
Minckler, Rex, 105
Mindell, David, 88–89
Minsky, Marvin, 171, 277
missiles, German development of, 86, 88
Mitchell, Silas Weir, 210
Monticello, 227
Moore, Betty, see Shannon, Betty Moore
More, Trenchard, 229
Morgenstern, Oskar, 240
Morristown, N.J., 184
Morse, Marston, 74–75
Morse, Samuel, 146
Morse code, 10–11, 132, 145, 146, 159n, 236
Motorola, 242
Moulton, Maria, 110, 113, 114, 115
CS’s relationship with, 111
Mount Auburn Cemetery, Cambridge, 272
Müllabfuhrwortmaschine, 148n
Murray State University, 264
Muslims, 250
Mystic Lake, 245
Nasar, Sylvia, 77, 170, 181, 195
Nash, John, 77–78, 170, 172, 181, 263
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), 65
National Defense Research Committee (NDRC), 81–82, 83, 89
CS’s work for, 87–89
National Medal of Science, 258
National Register of Historic Places, 227
National Research Fellowship, 63

National Security Agency (NSA), 96, 100, 194, 196–98
National Security Scientific Advisory Board, 196–98
nature-nurture problem, 53
Navajo Indians, in World War II cryptology, 98
Naval Academy, U.S., 194
Navy, U.S., 15, 85, 105, 194
Neuhoff, David, 269
Nevada, 246
New Deal, 182
New Hampshire, 63
New Jersey, 223, 226
New Jersey College for Women, 183
Newton, Isaac, xi, xii, 23, 25, 32, 54, 89, 122, 136, 180, 217, 265, 279
New York, N.Y., 12, 62, 63, 79, 91, 104–5, 126, 170, 177, 223
CS’s apartment in, 110–11, 136, 182
jazz scene in, 110
New Yorker, 209
New York State, 27
New York Times, 48, 178, 182, 273
nicknames, 153
Nobel, Alfred, 48
Nobel Prize, 67, 68, 170, 188, 263, 264
noise, xiv, 86, 309n
quantification of, 136
redundancy and, 158–59
signal vs., 119–20, 123–24, 126, 127, 156–61, 179
North Korea, 197
Nyquist, Harry, 126–30, 131, 132, 133, 134, 138, 141, 144, 157, 308n
fax prototype of, 126–27
Ogden, John, 11–12
Oliver, Bernard “Barney,” 67, 111–12, 113, 259
Omni, 188

one-time pads, 101–2
On the Origin of Species (Darwin), 170
Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 93, 171
Otsego County, Mich., 6
Otsego County Herald Times, 48
Otsego County Times, 5, 11
Oxford, N.J., 6
Oxford English Dictionary, 153
Oxford University, CS’s fellowship at, 259–60
Palo Alto, Calif., 227
Paris, 62, 79
Parkinson, David, 87–88
Pascal, Blaise, 58, 59
Pearl Harbor, Japanese attack on, 91, 97, 197
Pennsylvania, University of, 107, 236
Perkins, Tom, 111–12
Philadelphia, Pa., 210
Philippines, 52
Phillips, H. B., 74, 75
Pickup on Noon Street (Chandler), 152–53
pictures:
Nyquist’s prototype for transmitting, 126–27
quantification of, 135
Pierce, John, 112–13, 123, 137, 182, 259
Piper Cub, 47
Pitts, Walter, 177–78
pixels, 135
Plato, 172
Platt, John R., 178
playfulness, as central to CS’s nature, xi, xv, 46, 266, 267, 270, 277, 278–81
Poe, Edgar Allan, 4, 149–50, 151, 211
Poincaré, Henri, 180

Poincaré conjecture, 69
Poland, 14
Pollak, Henry, 70, 199, 205, 226, 235–36
Pollen, Arthur, 294n
Polster, Burkard, 250
“Poor Boy, A” (Shannon), 9
Pope, Alexander, 25, 27
Popular Science, 205
“Portfolio Problem, The” (Shannon lecture), 224–25
potentiometers, 87–88
Poundstone, William, 48, 187, 201, 242
Price, Robert, 197–98, 242
Princeton, N.J., 77–78
Princeton University, 79, 141
Prisoner’s Dilemma, 75–76
probability, in information theory, 141–44
problems, CS on strategies for solving, 218–20
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 244
Profile Tracer, 21–22, 25, 27–28, 31
“Programming a Computer for Playing Chess” (Shannon), 212–16
“Project Cyclops,” 112
“Project X,” see SIGSALY system
PTA, 7
Pythian Sisters, 7
Qualcomm, 233
quantum mechanics, 76, 131, 186, 187
Quhi, Abu Sahl al-, 250
radar, 167
Radcliffe College, 62, 63
radio, 265
RAND Corporation, 93
Rastelli, Enrico, 254

Red Cross, 7
redundancy, 132, 151–56, 310n
adding, coding for, 159–60
elimination of, coding for, 154–56
in languages, 158–59
noise and, 158–59
transmission speed and, 154–56
relativity, theory of, 76, 186, 187
relay switches, 203–4, 215
CS’s study of, xiii, xv, 34–35, 37–42, 46, 72–73, 160, 203
“Reliable Machines from Unreliable Components” (Shannon lecture), 224
Republicans, 14
Reserve Officers Training Corps (ROTC), 17
restating, in problem solving, 219
Ridenour, Louis, 167, 168, 169
Riemann hypothesis, 69, 209
Roberts, Larry, 232
Rockefeller Foundation, 34, 166, 167
Division of Natural Sciences at, 166
Roosevelt, Franklin D., xiii, 14, 67, 80, 81, 97–98, 150, 182
Rosser, J. Barkley, 92, 94
roulette, 244, 245–46
Rubik’s cubes, 222, 243, 280
Russell, Bertrand, xv, 177, 180, 263, 273
Russia, 14
Rutgers University, 79, 183
Ruthven, A. G., 14
Sagan, Carl, xiv
Samuelson, Paul, 176
San Francisco, Calif., 126
Saturn, 262
Schellenberg, Walter, 97–98

Schramm, Wilbur, 167–68, 169
Scientific American, 165, 214, 280, 281
Scientology, 200–201
Second Law of Thermodynamics, 162n
Sedgwick, Adam, 170
Segrè, Emilio Gino, 263
Selective Service and Training Act (1940), 80
“Seminar on Information Theory” (Shannon lecture), 224
Shannon, Betty Moore, 192, 203, 212, 215, 223, 227, 246, 256, 257, 258, 262, 264–65, 272
background of, 182
at Bell Labs, 183–84
CS’s Alzheimer’s and, 269, 270–71
CS’s courtship of, 182, 184
education of, 182–83
family life of, 233–34
investing by, 234, 238–42
mathematical talent of, 183–85
professional partnership of CS and, 184–85
wedding of CS and, 184
Shannon, Catherine, 8, 9, 13, 18, 184, 264–65
Shannon, Claude Elwood, xi–xv
abstractive genius of, 46
Alfred Noble Prize awarded to, 48
Alzheimer’s disease of, 268–71
atheism of, 46, 84
barbed wire telegraph of, xii, 4–5, 34, 72
at Bell Labs, 38, 68, 70, 71–73, 101
Bell Labs friends of, 111–14
Betty Moore and, see Shannon, Betty Moore
birth of, 8
Boolean algebra and, 37–39
as both mathematician and engineer, 275, 276
chess as passion of, 199, 211–12

childhood and adolescence of, xii, 4–5, 8, 9–11, 19, 34, 72, 126
at Cold Spring Harbor, 49, 53–60
computerized chess and, xv, 212–16
cryptography as early interest of, 4, 19
cryptography expertise of, xiii, 95, 101–2, 104, 152, 193–94, 195, 310n
curiosity of, 202–3, 266, 275
death of, 271–72
demands on time of, 195
draft worries of, 80–81, 82
dual engineering and math undergraduate degrees of, 16–17
Erector sets of, xv, 6, 11, 203, 256
family life of, 233
flight training of, 47
Fry’s mentoring of, 68, 75, 81, 83, 90, 166
gambling strategies and, 244
Greenwich Village apartment of, 110–11, 136, 182
growing fame of, xiv, 188–89
honors and prizes awarded to, 257–59, 261–62
on human-machine interactions, 207–9
impatience of, 113–14
as inconsistent correspondent, 200
information theory invented by, see information theory
at Institute for Advanced Study, 74–80, 162
intellectual courage of, 277–78
intuitive thought process of, 184–85, 230, 232–33, 245
investing by, 234, 238–42
jazz as passion of, 61, 110, 111, 255
juggling as passion of, see juggling
Kyoto laureate lecture of, 265–67
Kyoto Prize awarded to, 263–67
legacy of, 273–81
machines as fascination of, 203–9
master’s thesis of, xiii, 39–43

mathematics as early interest of, 9, 10, 16–17
mechanical abilities of, 10–11, 16–17
misapplication of information theory as concerning to, 190–92
as MIT full professor, 225, 228–33, 234–35, 236, 239, 240–41, 244, 246, 248, 261, 262,
276
as MIT graduate student, xii, 32, 34, 45–49, 61, 74, 94, 177
as MIT visiting professor, 223–25
modesty and self-effacement of, xii, xiv, xv, 48, 107, 179, 257, 262, 275, 276, 278
National Medal of Science awarded to, 258
National Research Fellowship of, 63
NDRC work of, 81–82
Norma Levor and, see Shannon, Norma Levor
numerous publications of, 235
Oxford fellowship of, 259–60
playfulness of, xi, xv, 46, 266, 267, 270, 277, 278–81
poetry written by, 63, 280–81
practical nature of, 72
publishing results as secondary to, 59–60
puzzle solutions published by, 19–20
roulette prediction device of Thorp and, 245–46
as SCAG member, 196–98
self-isolation of, xii, 46, 47–48, 59, 62, 79, 114, 185, 202, 230
shyness of, 46, 47–48
Stanford fellowship of, 226, 258–59
teaching method of, 232
Theseus project of, 203–7, 211, 217, 266, 278
as tinkerer, xii, xv, 10, 11, 45–46, 72, 228–29, 233, 234, 243, 244–45, 270, 271, 276
unicycles of, xv, 199, 228, 248, 249, 279
at University of Michigan, 13, 15–20, 35, 39–43
war work disliked by, 93–94, 95
wealth of, 238, 239–40
wide-ranging interests of, 275–76
Winchester house of, see Entropy House

work as hobby for, 266
Shannon, Claude Elwood, Sr., 5–6, 8
death of, 18
Shannon, David, Jr., 11
Shannon, Mabel Wolf, 5–7, 8, 290n
CS’s estrangement from, 18
Shannon, Norma Levor, 77, 78, 110
atheism of, 63
background of, 62
CS’s courtship of, 62–63
divorce of CS and, 79–80, 184
intellectual ambitions of, 63, 80
at Radcliffe, 62, 63
wedding of CS and, 63
Shannon, Peggy, 183, 228, 233, 234, 238–39, 240, 242, 249, 258, 261, 264–65, 268–69, 270,
271
Shannon family, 233–34, 258, 269
travels by, 261–62
Shannon Limit, 157, 270, 274, 325n
Sheldon, William, 111
Shockley, William, 67
shorthand, 153
shumi (hobby), 266
signals:
conversion of, from analog to digital, 134–35
fluctuation of, 127
noise vs., 119–20, 123–24, 126, 127, 156–61, 179
SIGSALY system, 96, 98–99, 100, 101, 103
Silverberg, Robert, 252–53
similarities, in problem solving, 219
simplifying, in problem solving, 219
Singleton, Henry, 239
$64,000 Question (TV show), 225

Slepian, David, 114, 184
slide rules, 265–66
Smith, Adam, 240
Smith, Walter Bedell, 193–94, 195
smoothing, 88
Socrates, 37, 172, 253
solutions, CS on strategies for arriving at, 218–20
South Korea, 197
Soviet Union, 166, 174, 194, 211–12
Spanish Civil War, 86
Special Cryptologic Advisory Group (SCAG), 196–98
spinning jenny, 265
Staebler, Edward, 14
Stanford University, 178, 258–59
Center for Advanced Study in Behavioral Sciences at, 226
Staten Island, N.Y., 182
steam engine, 265
stochastic processes, 76
information as, 145–53
Stockholm, Sweden, 264
stock market, 243
Shannons’ investments in, 234, 238–42
stock market crash of 1929, 14
structural analysis, in problem solving, 219–20
SWEATER project, 196
Sweden, 126
Swift, Edgar James, 250–51
“Symbolic Analysis of Relay and Switching Circuits, A” (Shannon), 39–43
Szegoő, Gábor, 94
Szilard, Leo, 162n
technology, CS’s optimistic view of, 208–9
Teledyne, 239, 242

telegraphs, telegraphy, 127, 265
homemade networks of, 4–5
information theory and, 145
telephone networks, 38, 66, 77, 125–26
automated switchboards in, 126
color coding of, 71–72
relays in, 72–73, 203
“thalassophilia,” 51
“Theorem on Color Coding” (Shannon), 71–73
“Theoretical Possibilities Using Codes with Different Numbers of Current Values” (Nyquist),
128
thermodynamics, Second Law of, 162n
Theseus (maze-solving mechanical mouse), xv, 203–7, 211, 217, 266, 278
thinking machines:
CS on future of, 266
CS’s fascination with, 203–9
see also artificial intelligence; computers, digital
Thomson, William, Lord Kelvin, 36, 43, 123, 124, 125, 127, 157
harmonic analyzer of, 25–28
transatlantic cable and, 120, 121–22
Thorp, Ed, 243–46
Thorp, Vivian, 246
THROBAC (Thrifty Roman-Numeral Backward-Looking Computer), xv, 207, 243
Throop College of Technology, 83
tides, prediction of, 24–25, 127
Time, 22, 188, 205
Tonga, Tongans, 252–53
transatlantic telegraph cable, 119–24, 157, 158
transatlantic telephony, first successful experiment in, 130–31
“Transmission of Information” (Hartley), 131
transmission speed, redundancy and, 154–56
Tufts University, 176
Tukey, John, 141

TUNNY, 96
turbo codes, 325n
Turing, Alan, xiii, 42–43, 99, 150
cryptography and, 103–6
CS’s friendship with, 104, 106–9
death of, 109
Turing Machines, 103, 106
Turing Test, 209
“Turk, The” (hoax), 210–11, 212
Turkey, 261
Tuxedo Park laboratory, 93
U-boats, 167
Ultimate Machine, xv, 207, 278
uncertainty, in information theory, 142–44, 311n
unicycles, xv, 199, 228, 248, 249, 279
United States, British mistrust of, 105–6
University of Illinois Press, 168
Upper Mystic Lake, 227
“Use of the Lakatos-Hickman Relay in a Suburban-Sender Case, The” (Shannon), 72
Valentia Island, 122
Vanity Fair, 254
Veblen, Oscar, 74, 75
Verdú, Sergio, 174, 179
Versailles, Treaty of, 86
Virginia, 131
Vocoder (Voice Encoder), 99, 100
Voder (Voice Operation Demonstrator), 99–100
Vogue, 207–8
Von Neumann, John, xiii, 74, 75–76, 93, 162, 172, 175, 194, 195–96, 197, 198, 240
Voyager I, xiv, 262
Voyage Round the World, A (Forster), 252–53

Wall Street Journal, 238
Wall Street Week (TV show), 241
Walter Reed Hospital, 198
Washington, D.C., 196
Washington Square Park, (New York City), 110
Watson, James, 188
Watson, Thomas A., 123, 126
Watt, James, 265
Wealth of Nations, The (Smith), 240
Weaver, Warren, 83–85, 86, 89, 90, 166–67, 168–69
Wenger, Joseph, 194–95, 196
Western Electric, 65, 66, 99
Weyl, Hermann, 76–77, 145
White House, 258
Whitehouse, O. E. Wildman, 121–22, 157
Wiener, Leo, 175–76
Wiener, Norbert, 9, 74, 175–80, 187, 263
wig-wag (flag) signaling, 10–11, 126
Wilkins, Maurice, 188
Winchester, Mass., 227–28, 231, 233, 235, 249, 271
wireless telegraphy and telephony, 16
Wisconsin, 83
Wisconsin, University of, 83, 92
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 199
World’s Fair (1939), 99
World War I, 26–27, 81, 194
World War II, 22, 80, 86–90, 91–95, 137, 167, 196
cryptography and, 96–101, 103–6
Pacific Theater of, 194
see also fire control
World Wide Web, 237
Wright, Sewall, 52

Xenophon, 253
Yale University, 126, 194
“You and Your Research” (Hamming lecture), 277
Zen Buddhism, 263
Ziv, Jacob, 262

Simon & Schuster
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020
www.SimonandSchuster.com
Copyright 2017 by Jimmy Soni and Rob Goodman
All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof in any form
whatsoever. For information, address Simon & Schuster Subsidiary Rights Department, 1230
Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020.
First Simon & Schuster hardcover edition July 2017
SIMON & SCHUSTER and colophon are registered trademarks of Simon & Schuster, Inc.
For information about special discounts for bulk purchases, please contact Simon & Schuster
Special Sales at 1-866-506-1949 or business@simonandschuster.com.
The Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live event. For more
information or to book an event, contact the Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau at 1-866248-3049 or visit our website at www.simonspeakers.com.
Interior design by Lewelin Polanco
Jacket design by Lauren Peters-Collaer
Jacket photo by Alfred Eisenstaedt/The Life Picture Collection/Getty Images
Background images by Sedmi and Photocell/Shutterstock
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Soni, Jimmy. | Goodman, Rob.
Title: A mind at play : how Claude Shannon invented the information age / by Jimmy Soni and
Rob Goodman.
Description: New York : Simon & Schuster, 2017. | Includes bibliographical references and
index.

Identifiers: LCCN 2016050944 (print) | LCCN 2016051979 (ebook) | ISBN 9781476766683
(hardcover : alk. paper) | ISBN 9781476766690 (trade pbk. : alk. paper) | ISBN 9781476766706
(ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Shannon, Claude Elwood, 1916–2001. | Mathematicians—United States—
Biography. | Electrical engineers—United States—Biography. | Information theory.
Classification: LCC QA29.S423 S66 2017 (print) | LCC QA29.S423 (ebook) | DDC 003/.54092
[B] —dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016050944
ISBN 978-1-4767-6668-3
ISBN 978-1-4767-6670-6 (ebook)

